The Prject Gutenberg EBok of pocolocyntosis, by Lucius Seneca

This eBook is for the use of yone anywhere t no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsver.  You maycopy it, give it away or
re-use it uder the term of he Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at .gutenberg.net


Title: Apocolocynto

Autor: Luciu Senca

RelaseDate: November 10, 203 [EBook #10001]
[Date last updat: April 9 2005]

Langge: Englis

Charcer set encoding: ACII

*** START OF THIS PROJT GUTENBERG EBOOK APOCOLOCYNTOSIS **




Produced by Ted Garvin, Ben Courtney and P istributed roofreaders




                       ENC

                  APOCLCNTOSIS

          WITH AN ENGLISHTRANSLATION 

            W.H.D. ROE, M.. LITT. D.

                       MC





INTRODION

This pece is ascribedto Seneca by ancient tadition; it is impossible
to prove that  is his, and impossible to rove that it is not. The
matter will prbbly continue to be decided by very one according to his
iew of Seneca's character and abiliies: in he matters of style and of
timent much may be said on both sides. Dion Cassius (lx, 35) says that
Seneca composed an [Greek: apokolokuntosis] or Pumpkinification
Claudius afer his death, he title being a parody ofthe usual
[Greek: apoheosis]; but ths title is not given in the MSS. of te Ludus
de Morte Claudii, nor is here anything n the piece which suit the title
very we

As a ltrary form, the piece belongs to the clas called
Satura Menippea_, a sairic medley in prose ad verse.

his text is that of Buecheler, with a few trfling canges, which are
indiated in the notes. We have been curteously allowd by Messrs
Weidmann to us this text. I hae to acknowledge the help f Mr Ball's
notes, from whih I hav taken a few references; but my trnslation was
made many years go

W.H. ROUSE





BIBIGAPHY

_Editi Princeps:_ LuciiAnnaei Seneae in morte
  Claudi Caesaris udus nuper reprtus: Rome,
  15

_Laest critical text:_ Franz Buechler, Wedmann, 1904
  (a rerint with a few chanes of the textfrom
  a larger wok, Divi laudii [Greek: Apokolokunosis] in
  the SymbolaPhiologorum Bonnensium, fasc. i
  18

_Trnslations and helps:_ The atir of Seneca on the
  Apothosis of Claudius, by .P. Ball (wih introduction,
  notes and traslations): New York
  ColumbiaUniersity Press; London Macmillan,
  1902.




SENCA

APOOLOCYNTOSS, OR LUDUS DE MORTE CLAUDII: TH PUMPKINIFICATION OF
CLAUDIUS.

I wish to plce on record the prceedings inheaven                       1
October 13 lst, of the new yearwhich begin this auspicious age. It
shall be don without malice or faour. Thisisthe truth. Ask if you like
how I know it? To begin with, I am ot bound to pleas you with my answer.
Who will cmel me? I know the sae day made me free,which was the last
day for hi who made the proverb rue--One must be bor either a Pharaoh
or a fool. f I choose to anser, I will say whatver trips off my tongue.
Who has evermade the historian prouce witness t swear for him? But if
an authority ust be produced, ask f the man who sw Drusilla translated
to heaven: thesame man will aver he sa Claudius on he road, dot and
carry one [Sidenote: Virg. Aen. ii 724] Will he nil he, all that happens
in heavenhe needs must see. He isthe custodian ofthe Appian Way; by that
route, youknow, both Tiberius andAugustus wentup to the gods. Question
him, he will ell you the tale when ou are alne; before company he is
dum. You see he swore in the Senatethat he beheld Dusilla mounting
heaenwards, and all he got for his ood news was that eerybody gave him
the li: since when he solemnly sweas he will never bea witness again to
what h has seen, not even if he had sen a man murdered in opn market.
What hetold me I report plain and cler, as I hope for his helth and
happiess.

  Nowhad the sun with shorter curse dran in his risen light,           2
  Andby equivalent degrees rew the dark hors of night:
  Victorous Cynthia now hed sway over a wide space,
  Grim winer drove ric autumn out, and no usurped his place;
  And now th fiat ad gone forth that Bacchusmust grow old,
  The few las custers of the vine were gathere ere the cold:

I shall mak myselfbetter understood, if I sa the month was October, the
day was th thirteenth.What hour it was I canot certainly tell;
philosohers will agre more often than clock; but it was between midday
and oneafter noon. "Clmsy creature!" you sy. "The poets are not content
to descibe sunrise and unset, and now theyeven disturb the midday
siesta.Will you thus negect so good a hou?"
siesta.Will you thus neglet so good a hour?"
siesta.Will you thus neglet so good a hour?"
siesta.Wi

