DESCRIPTION="First 25 Cantos of Dante's Inferno in English. Translated by James Romanes Sibbald."


THE INFERNO.

CANTO I.

  In middle of the journey of our days
    I found that I was in a darksome wood--
    The right road lost and vanished in the maze.
  Ah me! how hard to make it understood
    How rough that wood was, wild, and terrible:
    By the mere thought my terror is renewed.
  More bitter scarce were death. But ere I tell
    At large of good which there by me was found,
    I will relate what other things befell.
  Scarce know I how I entered on that ground,                       10
    So deeply, at the moment when I passed
    From the right way, was I in slumber drowned.
  But when beneath a hill arrived at last,
    Which for the boundary of the valley stood,
    That with such terror had my heart harassed,
  I upwards looked and saw its shoulders glowed,
    Radiant already with that planet's light
    Which guideth surely upon every road.
  A little then was quieted by the sight
    The fear which deep within my heart had lain                    20
    Through all my sore experience of the night.
  And as the man, who, breathing short in pain,
    Hath 'scaped the sea and struggled to the shore,
    Turns back to gaze upon the perilous main;
  Even so my soul which fear still forward bore
    Turned to review the pass whence I egressed,
    And which none, living, ever left before.
  My wearied frame refreshed with scanty rest,
    I to ascend the lonely hill essayed;
    The lower foot still that on which I pressed.              30
  And lo! ere I had well beginning made,
    A nimble leopard, light upon her feet,
    And in a skin all spotted o'er arrayed:
  Nor ceased she e'er me full in the face to meet,
    And to me in my path such hindrance threw
    That many a time I wheeled me to retreat.
  It was the hour of dawn; with retinue
    Of stars that were with him when Love Divine
    In the beginning into motion drew
  Those beauteous things, the sun began to shine;                   40
    And I took heart to be of better cheer
    Touching the creature with the gaudy skin,
  Seeing 'twas morn, and spring-tide of the year;
    Yet not so much but that when into sight
    A lion came, I was disturbed with fear.
  Towards me he seemed advancing in his might,
    Rabid with hunger and with head high thrown:
    The very air was tremulous with fright.
  A she-wolf, too, beheld I further on;
    All kinds of lust seemed in her leanness pent:                  50
    Through her, ere now, much folk have misery known.
  By her oppressed, and altogether spent
    By the terror breathing from her aspect fell,
    I lost all hope of making the ascent.
  And as the man who joys while thriving well,
    When comes the time to lose what he has won
    In all his thoughts weeps inconsolable,
  So mourned I through the brute which rest knows none:
    She barred my way again and yet again,
    And thrust me back where silent is the sun.                     60
  And as I downward rushed to reach the plain,
    Before mine eyes appeared there one aghast,
    And dumb like those that silence long maintain.
  When I beheld him in the desert vast,
    'Whate'er thou art, or ghost or man,' I cried,
    'I pray thee show such pity as thou hast.'
  'No man, though once I was; on either side
    Lombard my parents were, and both of them
    For native place had Mantua,' he replied.
  'Though late, _sub Julio_, to the world I came,              70
    And lived at Rome in good Augustus' day,
    While yet false gods and lying were supreme.
  Poet I was, renowning in my lay
    Anchises' righteous son, who fled from Troy
    What time proud Ilion was to flames a prey.
  But thou, why going back to such annoy?
    The hill delectable why fear to mount,
    The origin and ground of every joy?'
  'And thou in sooth art Virgil, and the fount
    Whence in a stream so full doth language flow?'                 80
    Abashed, I answered him with humble front.
  'Of other poets light and honour thou!
    Let the long study and great zeal I've shown
    In searching well thy book, avail me now!
  My master thou, and author thou, alone!
    From thee alone I, borrowing, could attain
    The style consummate which has made me known.
  Behold the beast which makes me turn again:
    Deliver me from her, illustrious Sage;
    Because of her I tremble, pulse and vein.'                      90
  'Thou must attempt another pilgrimage,'
    Observing that I wept, he made reply,
    'If from this waste thyself thou 'dst disengage.
  Because the beast thou art afflicted by
    Will suffer none along her way to pass,
    But, hindering them, harasses till they die.
  So vile a nature and corrupt she has,
    Her raging lust is still insatiate,
    And food but makes it fiercer than it was.
  Many a creature hath she ta'en for mate,                    100
    And more she'll wed until the hound comes forth
    To slay her and afflict with torment great.
  He will not batten upon pelf or earth;
    But he shall feed on valour, love, and lore;
    Feltro and Feltro 'tween shall be his birth.
  He will save humbled Italy, and restore,
    For which of old virgin Camilla died;
    Turnus, Euryalus, Nisus, died of yore.
  Her through all cities chasing far and wide,
    He at the last to Hell will thrust her down,                   110
    Whence envy first unloosed her. I decide
  Therefore and judge that thou hadst best come on
    With me for guide; and hence I'll lead thee where
    A place eternal shall to thee be shown.
  There shalt thou hear the howlings of despair
    In which the ancient spirits make lament,
    All of them fain the second death to share.
  Next shalt thou them behold who are content,
    Because they hope some time, though now in fire,
    To join the blessed they will win consent.                     120
  And if to these thou later wouldst aspire,
    A soul shall guide thee, worthier far than I;
    When I depart thee will I leave with her.
  Because the Emperor who reigns on high
    Wills not, since 'gainst His laws I did rebel,
    That to His city I bring any nigh.
  O'er all the world He rules, there reigns as well;
    There is His city and exalted seat:
    O happy whom He chooses there to dwell!'
  And I to him: 'Poet, I thee entreat,                             130
    Even by that God who was to thee unknown,
    That I may 'scape this present ill, nor meet
  With worse, conduct me whither thou hast shown,
    That I may see Saint Peter's gate, and those
    Whom thou reportest in such misery thrown.'
  He moved away; behind him held I close.


CANTO II.


  It was the close of day; the twilight brown
    All living things on earth was setting free
    From toil, while I preparing was alone
  To face the battle which awaited me,
    As well of ruth as of the perilous quest,
    Now to be limned by faultless memory.
  Help, lofty genius! Muses, manifest
    Goodwill to me! Recording what befell,
    Do thou, O mind, now show thee at thy best!
  I thus began: 'Poet, and Guide as well,                           10
    Ere trusting me on this adventure wide,
    Judge if my strength of it be capable.
  Thou say'st that Silvius' father, ere he died,
    Still mortal to the world immortal went,
    There in the body some time to abide.
  Yet that the Foe of evil was content
    That he should come, seeing what high effect,
    And who and what should from him claim descent,
  No room for doubt can thoughtful man detect:
    For he of noble Rome, and of her sway                           20
    Imperial, in high Heaven grew sire elect.
  And both of these, the very truth to say,
    Were founded for the holy seat, whereon
    The Greater Peter's follower sits to-day.
  Upon this journey, praised by thee, were known
    And heard things by him, to the which he owed
    His triumph, whence derives the Papal gown.
  That path the Chosen Vessel later trod
    So of the faith assurance to receive,
    Which is beginning of salvation's road.                         30
  But why should I go? Who will sanction give?
    For I am no Æneas and no Paul;
    Me worthy of it no one can believe,
  Nor I myself. Hence venturing at thy call,
    I dread the journey may prove rash. But vain
    For me to reason; wise, thou know'st it all.'
  Like one no more for what he wished for fain,
    Whose purpose shares mutation with his thought
    Till from the thing begun he turns again;
  On that dim slope so grew I all distraught,                       40
    Because, by brooding on it, the design
    I shrank from, which before I warmly sought.
  'If well I understand these words of thine,'
    The shade of him magnanimous made reply,
    'Thy soul 'neath cowardice hath sunk supine,
  Which a man often is so burdened by,
    It makes him falter from a noble aim,
    As beasts at objects ill-distinguished shy.
  To loose thee from this terror, why I came,
    And what the speech I heard, I will relate,                     50
    When first of all I pitied thee. A dame
  Hailed me where I 'mongst those in dubious state
    Had my abode: so blest was she and fair,
    Her to command me I petitioned straight.
  Her eyes were shining brighter than the star;
    And she began to say in accents sweet
    And tuneable as angel's voices are:
  "O Mantuan Shade, in courtesy complete,
    Whose fame survives on earth, nor less shall grow
    Through all the ages, while the world hath seat;                60
  A friend of mine, with fortune for his foe,
    Has met with hindrance on his desert way,
    And, terror-smitten, can no further go,
  But turns; and that he is too far astray,
    And that I rose too late for help, I dread,
    From what in Heaven concerning him they say.
  Go, with thy speech persuasive him bestead,
    And with all needful help his guardian prove,
    That touching him I may be comforted.
  Know, it is Beatrice seeks thee thus to move.                     70
    Thence come I where I to return am fain:
    My coming and my plea are ruled by love.
  When I shall stand before my Lord again,
    Often to Him I will renew thy praise."
    And here she ceased, nor did I dumb remain:
  "O virtuous Lady, thou alone the race
    Of man exaltest 'bove all else that dwell
    Beneath the heaven which wheels in narrowest space.
  To do thy bidding pleases me so well,
    Though 'twere already done 'twere all too slow;                 80
    Thy wish at greater length no need to tell.
  But say, what tempted thee to come thus low,
    Even to this centre, from the region vast,
    Whither again thou art on fire to go?"
  "This much to learn since a desire thou hast,"
    She answered, "briefly thee I'll satisfy,
    How, coming here, I through no terrors passed.
  We are, of right, such things alarmèd by,
    As have the power to hurt us; all beside
    Are harmless, and not fearful. Wherefore I--                    90
  Thus formed by God, His bounty is so wide--
    Am left untouched by all your miseries,
    And through this burning unmolested glide.
  A noble lady is in Heaven, who sighs
    O'er the obstruction where I'd have thee go,
    And breaks the rigid edict of the skies.
  Calling on Lucia, thus she made her know
    What she desired: 'Thy vassal now hath need
    Of help from thee; do thou then helpful show.'
  Lucia, who hates all cruelty, in speed                           100
    Rose, and approaching where I sat at rest,
    To venerable Rachel giving heed,
  Me: 'Beatrice, true praise of God,' addressed;
    'Why not help him who had such love for thee,
    And from the vulgar throng to win thee pressed?
  Dost thou not hear him weeping pitiably,
    Nor mark the death now threatening him upon
    A flood than which less awful is the sea?'
  Never on earth did any ever run,
    Allured by profit or impelled by fear,                         110
    Swifter than I, when speaking she had done,
  From sitting 'mong the blest descended here,
    My trust upon thy comely rhetoric cast,
    Which honours thee and those who lend it ear."
  When of these words she spoken had the last,
    She turned aside bright eyes which tears did fill,
    And I by this was urged to greater haste.
  And so it was I joined thee by her will,
    And from that raging beast delivered thee,
    Which barred the near way up the beauteous hill.               120
  What ails thee then? Why thus a laggard be?
    Why cherish in thy heart a craven fear?
    Where is thy franchise, where thy bravery,
  When three such blessed ladies have a care
    For thee in Heaven's court, and these words of mine
    Thee for such wealth of blessedness prepare?'
  As flowers, by chills nocturnal made to pine
    And shut themselves, when touched by morning bright
    Upon their stems arise, full-blown and fine;
  So of my faltering courage changed the plight,                   130
    And such good cheer ran through my heart, it spurred
    Me to declare, like free-born generous wight:
  'O pitiful, who for my succour stirred!
    And thou how full of courtesy to run,
    Alert in service, hearkening her true word!
  Thou with thine eloquence my heart hast won
    To keen desire to go, and the intent
    Which first I held I now no longer shun.
  Therefore proceed; my will with thine is blent:
    Thou art my Guide, Lord, Master; thou alone!'             140
    Thus I; and with him, as he forward went,
  The steep and rugged road I entered on.





CANTO III.


  Through me to the city dolorous lies the way,
    Who pass through me shall pains eternal prove,
    Through me are reached the people lost for aye.
  'Twas Justice did my Glorious Maker move;
    I was created by the Power Divine,
    The Highest Wisdom, and the Primal Love.
  No thing's creation earlier was than mine,
    If not eternal; I for aye endure:
    Ye who make entrance, every hope resign!
  These words beheld I writ in hue obscure                          10
    On summit of a gateway; wherefore I:
    'Hard is their meaning, Master.' Like one sure
  Beforehand of my thought, he made reply:
    'Here it behoves to leave all fears behind;
    All cowardice behoveth here to die.
  For now the place I told thee of we find,
    Where thou the miserable folk shouldst see
    Who the true good of reason have resigned.'
  Then, with a glance of glad serenity,
    He took my hand in his, which made me bold,                     20
    And brought me in where secret things there be.
  There sighs and plaints and wailings uncontrolled
    The dim and starless air resounded through;
    Nor at the first could I from tears withhold.
  The various languages and words of woe,
    The uncouth accents, mixed with angry cries
    And smiting palms and voices loud and low,
  Composed a tumult which doth circling rise
    For ever in that air obscured for aye;
    As when the sand upon the whirlwind flies.                      30
  And, horror-stricken, I began to say:
    'Master, what sound can this be that I hear,
    And who the folk thus whelmed in misery?'
  And he replied: 'In this condition drear
    Are held the souls of that inglorious crew
    Who lived unhonoured, but from guilt kept clear.
  Mingled they are with caitiff angels, who,
    Though from avowed rebellion they refrained,
    Disloyal to God, did selfish ends pursue.
  Heaven hurled them forth, lest they her beauty stained;
    Received they are not by the nether hell,                       41
    Else triumph thence were by the guilty gained.'
  And I: 'What bear they, Master, to compel
    Their lamentations in such grievous tone?'
    He answered: 'In few words I will thee tell.
  No hope of death is to the wretches known;
    So dim the life and abject where they sigh
    They count all sufferings easier than their own.
  Of them the world endures no memory;
    Mercy and justice them alike disdain.                           50
    Speak we not of them: glance, and pass them by.'
  I saw a banner when I looked again,
    Which, always whirling round, advanced in haste
    As if despising steadfast to remain.
  And after it so many people chased
    In long procession, I should not have said
    That death had ever wrought such countless waste.
  Some first I recognised, and then the shade
    I saw and knew of him, the search to close,
    Whose dastard soul the great refusal made.                 60
  Straightway I knew and was assured that those
    Were of the tribe of caitiffs, even the race
    Despised of God and hated of His foes.
  The wretches, who when living showed no trace
    Of life, went naked, and were fiercely stung
    By wasps and hornets swarming in that place.
  Blood drawn by these out of their faces sprung
    And, mingled with their tears, was at their feet
    Sucked up by loathsome worms it fell among.
  Casting mine eyes beyond, of these replete,                       70
    People I saw beside an ample stream,
    Whereon I said: 'O Master, I entreat,
  Tell who these are, and by what law they seem
    Impatient till across the river gone;
    As I distinguish by this feeble gleam.'
  And he: 'These things shall unto thee be known
    What time our footsteps shall at rest be found
    Upon the woful shores of Acheron.'
  Then with ashamèd eyes cast on the ground,
    Fearing my words were irksome in his ear,                       80
    Until we reached the stream I made no sound.
  And toward us, lo, within a bark drew near
    A veteran who with ancient hair was white,
    Shouting: 'Ye souls depraved, be filled with fear.
  Hope never more of Heaven to win the sight;
    I come to take you to the other strand,
    To frost and fire and everlasting night.
  And thou, O living soul, who there dost stand,
    From 'mong the dead withdraw thee.' Then, aware
    That not at all I stirred at his command,                       90
  'By other ways, from other ports thou'lt fare;
    But they will lead thee to another shore,
    And 'tis a skiff more buoyant must thee bear.'
  And then my leader: 'Charon, be not sore,
    For thus it has been willed where power ne'er came
    Short of the will; thou therefore ask no more.'
  And hereupon his shaggy cheeks grew tame
    Who is the pilot of the livid pool,
    And round about whose eyes glowed wheels of flame.
  But all the shades, naked and spent with dool,                   100
    Stood chattering with their teeth, and changing hue
    Soon as they heard the words unmerciful.
  God they blasphemed, and families whence they grew;
    Mankind, the time, place, seed in which began
    Their lives, and seed whence they were born. Then drew
  They crowding all together, as they ran,
    Bitterly weeping, to the accursed shore
    Predestinate for every godless man.
  The demon Charon, with eyes evermore
    Aglow, makes signals, gathering them all;                      110
    And whoso lingers smiteth with his oar.
  And as the faded leaves of autumn fall
    One after the other, till at last the bough
    Sees on the ground spread all its coronal;
  With Adam's evil seed so haps it now:
    At signs each falls in turn from off the coast,
    As fowls into the ambush fluttering go.
  The gloomy waters thus by them are crossed,
    And ere upon the further side they land,
    On this, anew, is gathering a host.                            120
  'Son,' said the courteous Master, 'understand,
    All such as in the wrath of God expire,
    From every country muster on this strand.
  To cross the river they are all on fire;
    Their wills by Heavenly justice goaded on
    Until their terror merges in desire.
  This way no righteous soul has ever gone;
    Wherefore of thee if Charon should complain,
    Now art thou sure what by his words is shown.'
  When he had uttered this the dismal plain                        130
    Trembled so violently, my terror past
    Recalling now, I'm bathed in sweat again.
  Out of the tearful ground there moaned a blast
    Whence lightning flashed forth red and terrible,
    Which vanquished all my senses; and, as cast
  In sudden slumber, to the ground I fell.


CANTO IV.


  Resounding thunder broke the slumber deep
    That drowsed my senses, and myself I shook
    Like one by force awakened out of sleep.
  Then rising up I cast a steady look,
    With eyes refreshed, on all that lay around,
    And cognisance of where I found me took.
  In sooth, me on the valley's brink I found
    Of the dolorous abyss, where infinite
    Despairing cries converge with thundering sound.
  Cloudy it was, and deep, and dark as night;                       10
    So dark that, peering eagerly to find
    What its depths held, no object met my sight.
  'Descend we now into this region blind,'
    Began the Poet with a face all pale;
    'I will go first, and do thou come behind.'
  Marking the wanness on his cheek prevail,
    I asked, 'How can I, seeing thou hast dread,
    My wonted comforter when doubts assail?'
  'The anguish of the people,' then he said,
    'Who are below, has painted on my face                          20
    Pity, by thee for fear interpreted.
  Come! The long journey bids us move apace.'
    Then entered he and made me enter too
    The topmost circle girding the abyss.
  Therein, as far as I by listening knew,
    There was no lamentation save of sighs,
    Whence throbbed the air eternal through and through.
  This, sorrow without suffering made arise
    From infants and from women and from men,
    Gathered in great and many companies.                           30
  And the good Master: 'Wouldst thou nothing then
    Of who those spirits are have me relate?
    Yet know, ere passing further, although when
  On earth they sinned not, worth however great
    Availed them not, they being unbaptized--
    Part of the faith thou holdest. If their fate
  Was to be born ere man was Christianised,
    God, as behoved, they never could adore:
    And I myself am with this folk comprised.
  For such defects--our guilt is nothing more--                     40
    We are thus lost, suffering from this alone
    That, hopeless, we our want of bliss deplore.'
  Greatly I sorrowed when he made this known,
    Because I knew that some who did excel
    In worthiness were to that limbo gone.
  'Tell me, O Sir,' I prayed him, 'Master, tell,'
    --That I of the belief might surety win,
    Victorious every error to dispel--
  'Did ever any hence to bliss attain
    By merit of another or his own?'                                50
    And he, to whom my hidden drift was plain:
  'I to this place but lately had come down,
    When I beheld one hither make descent;
    A Potentate who wore a victor's crown.
  The shade of our first sire forth with him went,
    And his son Abel's, Noah's forth he drew,
    Moses' who gave the laws, the obedient
  Patriarch Abram's, and King David's too;
    And, with his sire and children, Israel,
    And Rachel, winning whom such toils he knew;                    60
  And many more, in blessedness to dwell.
    And I would have thee know, earlier than these
    No human soul was ever saved from Hell.'
  While thus he spake our progress did not cease,
    But we continued through the wood to stray;
    The wood, I mean, with crowded ghosts for trees.
  Ere from the summit far upon our way
    We yet had gone, I saw a flame which glowed,
    Holding a hemisphere of dark at bay.
  'Twas still a little further on our road,                         70
    Yet not so far but that in part I guessed
    That honourable people there abode.
  'Of art and science Ornament confessed!
    Who are these honoured in such high degree,
    And in their lot distinguished from the rest?'
  He said: 'For them their glorious memory,
    Still in thy world the subject of renown,
    Wins grace by Heaven distinguished thus to be.'
  Meanwhile I heard a voice: 'Be honour shown
    To the illustrious poet, for his shade                     80
    Is now returning which a while was gone.'
  When the voice paused nor further utterance made,
    Four mighty shades drew near with one accord,
    In aspect neither sorrowful nor glad.
  'Consider that one, armèd with a sword,'
    Began my worthy Master in my ear,
    'Before the three advancing like their lord;
  For he is Homer, poet with no peer:
    Horace the satirist is next in line,
    Ovid comes third, and Lucan in the rear.                        90
  And 'tis because their claim agrees with mine
    Upon the name they with one voice did cry,
    They to their honour in my praise combine.'
  Thus I beheld their goodly company--
    The lords of song in that exalted style
    Which o'er all others, eagle-like, soars high.
  Having conferred among themselves a while
    They turned toward me and salutation made,
    And, this beholding, did my Master smile.
  And honour higher still to me was paid,                          100
    For of their company they made me one;
    So I the sixth part 'mong such genius played.
  Thus journeyed we to where the brightness shone,
    Holding discourse which now 'tis well to hide,
    As, where I was, to hold it was well done.
  At length we reached a noble castle's side
    Which lofty sevenfold walls encompassed round,
    And it was moated by a sparkling tide.
  This we traversed as if it were dry ground;
    I through seven gates did with those sages go;                 110
    Then in a verdant mead people we found
  Whose glances were deliberate and slow.
    Authority was stamped on every face;
    Seldom they spake, in tuneful voices low.
  We drew apart to a high open space
    Upon one side which, luminously serene,
    Did of them all a perfect view embrace.
  Thence, opposite, on the enamel green
    Were shown me mighty spirits; with delight
    I still am stirred them only to have seen.                     120
  With many more, Electra was in sight;
    'Mong them I Hector and Æneas spied,
    Cæsar in arms, his eyes, like falcon's, bright.
  And, opposite, Camilla I descried;
    Penthesilea too; the Latian King
    Sat with his child Lavinia by his side.
  Brutus I saw, who Tarquin forth did fling;
    Cornelia, Marcia, Julia, and Lucrece.
    Saladin sat alone. Considering
  What lay beyond with somewhat lifted eyes,                       130
    The Master I beheld of those that know,
    'Mong such as in philosophy were wise.
  All gazed on him as if toward him to show
    Becoming honour; Plato in advance
    With Socrates: the others stood below.
  Democritus who set the world on chance;
    Thales, Diogenes, Empedocles,
    Zeno, and Anaxagoras met my glance;
  Heraclitus, and Dioscorides,
    Wise judge of nature. Tully, Orpheus, were                     140
    With ethic Seneca and Linus. These,
  And Ptolemy, too, and Euclid, geometer,
    Galen, Hippocrates, and Avicen,
    Averroes, the same who did prepare
  The Comment, saw I; nor can tell again
    The names of all I saw; the subject wide
    So urgent is, time often fails me. Then
  Into two bands the six of us divide;
    Me by another way my Leader wise
    Doth from the calm to air which trembles, guide.               150
  I reach a part which all benighted lies.


CANTO V.


  From the First Circle thus I downward went
    Into the Second, which girds narrower space,
    But greater woe compelling loud lament.
  Minos waits awful there and snarls, the case
    Examining of all who enter in;
    And, as he girds him, dooms them to their place.
  I say, each ill-starred spirit must begin
    On reaching him its guilt in full to tell;
    And he, omniscient as concerning sin,
  Sees to what circle it belongs in Hell;                           10
    Then round him is his tail as often curled
    As he would have it stages deep to dwell.
  And evermore before him stand a world
    Of shades; and all in turn to judgment come,
    Confess and hear, and then are downward hurled.
  'O thou who comest to the very home
    Of woe,' when he beheld me Minos cried,
    Ceasing a while from utterance of doom,
  'Enter not rashly nor in all confide;
    By ease of entering be not led astray.'                         20
    'Why also growling?' answered him my Guide;
  'Seek not his course predestinate to stay;
    For thus 'tis willed where nothing ever fails
    Of what is willed. No further speech essay.'
  And now by me are agonising wails
    Distinguished plain; now am I come outright
    Where grievous lamentation me assails.
  Now had I reached a place devoid of light,
    Raging as in a tempest howls the sea
    When with it winds, blown thwart each other, fight.             30
  The infernal storm is raging ceaselessly,
    Sweeping the shades along with it, and them
    It smites and whirls, nor lets them ever be.
  Arrived at the precipitous extreme,
    In shrieks and lamentations they complain,
    And even the Power Divine itself blaspheme.
  I understood that to this mode of pain
    Are doomed the sinners of the carnal kind,
    Who o'er their reason let their impulse reign.
  As starlings in the winter-time combined                          40
    Float on the wing in crowded phalanx wide,
    So these bad spirits, driven by that wind,
  Float up and down and veer from side to side;
    Nor for their comfort any hope they spy
    Of rest, or even of suffering mollified.
  And as the cranes in long-drawn company
    Pursue their flight while uttering their song,
    So I beheld approach with wailing cry
  Shades lifted onward by that whirlwind strong.
    'Master, what folk are these,' I therefore said,           50
    'Who by the murky air are whipped along?'
  'She, first of them,' his answer thus was made,
    'Of whom thou wouldst a wider knowledge win,
    O'er many tongues and peoples, empire swayed.
  So ruined was she by licentious sin
    That she decreed lust should be uncontrolled,
    To ease the shame that she herself was in.
  She is Semiramis, of whom 'tis told
    She followed Ninus, and his wife had been.
    Hers were the realms now by the Sultan ruled.                   60
  The next is she who, amorous and self-slain,
    Unto Sichæus' dust did faithless show:
    Then lustful Cleopatra.' Next was seen
  Helen, for whom so many years in woe
    Ran out; and I the great Achilles knew,
    Who at the last encountered love for foe.
  Paris I saw and Tristram. In review
    A thousand shades and more, he one by one
    Pointed and named, whom love from life withdrew.
  And after I had heard my Teacher run                              70
    O'er many a dame of yore and many a knight,
    I, lost in pity, was wellnigh undone.
  Then I: 'O Poet, if I only might
    Speak with the two that as companions hie,
    And on the wind appear to be so light!'
  And he to me: 'When they shall come more nigh
    Them shalt thou mark, and by the love shalt pray
    Which leads them onward, and they will comply.'
  Soon as the wind bends them to where we stay
    I lift my voice: 'O wearied souls and worn!                     80
    Come speak with us if none the boon gainsay.'
  Then even as doves, urged by desire, return
    On outspread wings and firm to their sweet nest
    As through the air by mere volition borne,
  From Dido's band those spirits issuing pressed
    Towards where we were, athwart the air malign;
    My passionate prayer such influence possessed.
  'O living creature, gracious and benign,
    Us visiting in this obscurèd air,
    Who did the earth with blood incarnadine;                       90
  If in the favour of the King we were
    Who rules the world, we for thy peace would pray,
    Since our misfortunes thy compassion stir.
  Whate'er now pleases thee to hear or say
    We listen to, or tell, at your demand;
    While yet the wind, as now, doth silent stay.
  My native city lies upon the strand
    Where to the sea descends the river Po
    For peace, with all his tributary band.
  Love, in a generous heart set soon aglow,                        100
    Seized him for the fair form was mine above;
    And still it irks me to have lost it so.
  Love, which absolves no one beloved from love,
    So strong a passion for him in me wrought
    That, as thou seest, I still its mastery prove.
  Love led us where we in one death were caught.
    For him who slew us waits Caïna now.'
    Unto our ears these words from them were brought.
  When I had heard these troubled souls, my brow
    I downward bent, and long while musing stayed,                 110
    Until the Poet asked: 'What thinkest thou?'
  And when I answered him, 'Alas!' I said,
    'Sweet thoughts how many, and what strong desire,
    These to their sad catastrophe betrayed!'
  Then, turned once more to them, I to inquire
    Began: 'Francesca, these thine agonies
    Me with compassion unto tears inspire.
  But tell me, at the season of sweet sighs
    What sign made love, and what the means he chose
    To strip your dubious longings of disguise?'                   120
  And she to me: 'The bitterest of woes
    Is to remember in the midst of pain
    A happy past; as well thy teacher knows.
  Yet none the less, and since thou art so fain
    The first occasion of our love to hear,
    Like one I speak that cannot tears restrain.
  As we for pastime one day reading were
    How Lancelot by love was fettered fast--
    All by ourselves and without any fear--
  Moved by the tale our eyes we often cast                         130
    On one another, and our colour fled;
    But one word was it, vanquished us at last.
  When how the smile, long wearied for, we read
    Was kissed by him who loved like none before,
    This one, who henceforth never leaves me, laid
  A kiss on my mouth, trembling the while all o'er.
    The book was Galahad, and he as well
    Who wrote the book. That day we read no more.'
  And while one shade continued thus to tell,
    The other wept so bitterly, I swooned                          140
    Away for pity, and as dead I fell:
  Yea, as a corpse falls, fell I on the ground.




CANTO VI.


  When I regained my senses, which had fled
    At my compassion for the kindred two,
    Which for pure sorrow quite had turned my head,
  New torments and a crowd of sufferers new
    I see around me as I move again,
    Where'er I turn, where'er I bend my view.
  In the Third Circle am I of the rain
    Which, heavy, cold, eternal, big with woe,
    Doth always of one kind and force remain.
  Large hail and turbid water, mixed with snow,                     10
    Keep pouring down athwart the murky air;
    And from the ground they fall on, stenches grow.
  The savage Cerberus, a monster drear,
    Howls from his threefold throat with canine cries
    Above the people who are whelmèd there.
  Oily and black his beard, and red his eyes,
    His belly huge: claws from his fingers sprout.
    The shades he flays, hooks, rends in cruel wise.
  Beat by the rain these, dog-like, yelp and shout,
    And shield themselves in turn with either side;                 20
    And oft the wretched sinners turn about.
  When we by Cerberus, great worm, were spied,
    He oped his mouths and all his fangs he showed,
    While not a limb did motionless abide.
  My Leader having spread his hands abroad,
    Filled both his fists with earth ta'en from the ground,
    And down the ravening gullets flung the load.
  Then, as sharp set with hunger barks the hound,
    But is appeased when at his meat he gnaws,
    And, worrying it, forgets all else around;                      30
  So with those filthy faces there it was
    Of the fiend Cerberus, who deafs the crowd
    Of souls till they from hearing fain would pause.
  We, travelling o'er the spirits who lay cowed
    And sorely by the grievous showers harassed,
    Upon their semblances of bodies trod.
  Prone on the ground the whole of them were cast,
    Save one of them who sat upright with speed
    When he beheld that near to him we passed.
  'O thou who art through this Inferno led,                    40
    Me if thou canst,' he asked me, 'recognise;
    For ere I was dismantled thou wast made.'
  And I to him: 'Thy present tortured guise
    Perchance hath blurred my memory of thy face,
    Until it seems I ne'er on thee set eyes.
  But tell me who thou art, within this place
    So cruel set, exposed to such a pain,
    Than which, if greater, none has more disgrace.'
  And he: 'Thy city, swelling with the bane
    Of envy till the sack is running o'er,                          50
    Me in the life serene did once contain.
  As Ciacco me your citizens named of yore;
    And for the damning sin of gluttony
    I, as thou seest, am beaten by this shower.
  No solitary woful soul am I,
    For all of these endure the selfsame doom
    For the same fault.' Here ended his reply.
  I answered him, 'O Ciacco, with such gloom
    Thy misery weighs me, I to weep am prone;
    But, if thou canst, declare to what shall come                  60
  The citizens of the divided town.
    Holds it one just man? And declare the cause
    Why 'tis of discord such a victim grown.'
  Then he to me: 'After contentious pause
    Blood will be spilt; the boorish party then
    Will chase the others forth with grievous loss.
  The former it behoves to fall again
    Within three suns, the others to ascend,
    Holpen by him whose wiles ere now are plain.
  Long time, with heads held high, they'll make to bend
    The other party under burdens dire,                             71
    Howe'er themselves in tears and rage they spend.
  There are two just men, at whom none inquire.
    Envy, and pride, and avarice, even these
    Are the three sparks have set all hearts on fire.'
  With this the tearful sound he made to cease:
    And I to him, 'Yet would I have thee tell--
    And of thy speech do thou the gift increase--
  Tegghiaio and Farinata, honourable,
    James Rusticucci, Mosca, Arrigo,                           80
    With all the rest so studious to excel
  In good; where are they? Help me this to know;
    Great hunger for the news hath seizèd me;
    Delights them Heaven, or tortures Hell below?'
  He said: 'Among the blackest souls they be;
    Them to the bottom weighs another sin.
    Shouldst thou so far descend, thou mayst them see.
  But when the sweet world thou again dost win,
    I pray thee bring me among men to mind;
    No more I tell, nor new reply begin.'                           90
  Then his straightforward eyes askance declined;
    He looked at me a moment ere his head
    He bowed; then fell flat 'mong the other blind.
  'Henceforth he waketh not,' my Leader said,
    'Till he shall hear the angel's trumpet sound,
    Ushering the hostile Judge. By every shade
  Its dismal sepulchre shall then be found,
    Its flesh and ancient form it shall resume,
    And list what echoes in eternal round.'
  So passed we where the shades and rainy spume                    100
    Made filthy mixture, with steps taken slow;
    Touching a little on the world to come.
  Wherefore I said: 'Master, shall torments grow
    After the awful sentence hath been heard,
    Or lesser prove and not so fiercely glow?'
  'Repair unto thy Science,' was his word;
    'Which tells, as things approach a perfect state
    To keener joy or suffering they are stirred.
  Therefore although this people cursed by fate
    Ne'er find perfection in its full extent,                      110
    To it they then shall more approximate
  Than now.' Our course we round the circle bent,
    Still holding speech, of which I nothing say,
    Until we came where down the pathway went:
  There found we Plutus, the great enemy.


CANTO VII.


  Pape Satan! Pape Satan! Aleppe!
    Plutus began in accents rough and hard:
    And that mild Sage, all-knowing, said to me,
  For my encouragement: 'Pay no regard
    Unto thy fear; whatever power he sways
    Thy passage down this cliff shall not be barred.'
  Then turning round to that inflamèd face
    He bade: 'Accursed wolf, at peace remain;
    And, pent within thee, let thy fury blaze.
  Down to the pit we journey not in vain:                           10
    So rule they where by Michael in Heaven's height
    On the adulterous pride was vengeance ta'en.'
  Then as the bellied sails, by wind swelled tight,
    Suddenly drag whenever snaps the mast;
    Such, falling to the ground, the monster's plight.
  To the Fourth Cavern so we downward passed,
    Winning new reaches of the doleful shore
    Where all the vileness of the world is cast.
  Justice of God! which pilest more and more
    Pain as I saw, and travail manifold!                            20
    Why will we sin, to be thus wasted sore?
  As at Charybdis waves are forward rolled
    To break on other billows midway met,
    The people here a counterdance must hold.
  A greater crowd than I had seen as yet,
    With piercing yells advanced on either track,
    Rolling great stones to which their chests were set.
  They crashed together, and then each turned back
    Upon the way he came, while shouts arise,
    'Why clutch it so?' and 'Why to hold it slack?'                 30
  In the dark circle wheeled they on this wise
    From either hand to the opposing part,
    Where evermore they raised insulting cries.
  Thither arrived, each, turning, made fresh start
    Through the half circle a new joust to run;
    And I, stung almost to the very heart,
  Said, 'O my Master, wilt thou make it known
    Who the folk are? Were these all clerks who go
    Before us on the left, with shaven crown?'
  And he replied: 'All of them squinted so                          40
    In mental vision while in life they were,
    They nothing spent by rule. And this they show,
  And with their yelping voices make appear
    When half-way round the circle they have sped,
    And sins opposing them asunder tear.
  Each wanting thatch of hair upon his head
    Was once a clerk, or pope, or cardinal,
    In whom abound the ripest growths of greed.'
  And I: 'O Master, surely among all
    Of these I ought some few to recognise,                    50
    Who by such filthy sins were held in thrall.'
  And he to me: 'Vain thoughts within thee rise;
    Their witless life, which made them vile, now mocks--
    Dimming their faces still--all searching eyes.
  Eternally they meet with hostile shocks;
    These rising from the tomb at last shall stand
    With tight clenched fists, and those with ruined locks.
  Squandering or hoarding, they the happy land
    Have lost, and now are marshalled for this fray;
    Which to describe doth no fine words demand.                    60
  Know hence, my Son, how fleeting is the play
    Of goods at the dispose of Fortune thrown,
    And which mankind to such fierce strife betray.
  Not all the gold which is beneath the moon
    Could purchase peace, nor all that ever was,
    To but one soul of these by toil undone.'
  'Master,' I said, 'tell thou, ere making pause,
    Who Fortune is of whom thou speak'st askance,
    Who holds all worldly riches in her claws.'
  'O foolish creatures, lost in ignorance!'                         70
    He answer made. 'Now see that the reply
    Thou store, which I concerning her advance.
  He who in knowledge is exalted high,
    Framing all Heavens gave such as should them guide,
    That so each part might shine to all; whereby
  Is equal light diffused on every side:
    And likewise to one guide and governor,
    Of worldly splendours did control confide,
  That she in turns should different peoples dower                  79
    With this vain good; from blood should make it pass
    To blood, in spite of human wit. Hence, power,
  Some races failing, other some amass,
    According to her absolute decree
    Which hidden lurks, like serpent in the grass.
  Vain 'gainst her foresight yours must ever be.
    She makes provision, judges, holds her reign,
    As doth his power supreme each deity.
  Her permutations can no truce sustain;
    Necessity compels her to be swift,
    So swift they follow who their turn must gain.                  90
  And this is she whom they so often lift
    Upon the cross, who ought to yield her praise;
    And blame on her and scorn unjustly shift.
  But she is blest nor hears what any says,
    With other primal creatures turns her sphere,
    Jocund and glad, rejoicing in her ways.
  To greater woe now let us downward steer.
    The stars which rose when I began to guide
    Are falling now, nor may we linger here.'
  We crossed the circle to the other side,                         100
    Arriving where a boiling fountain fell
    Into a brooklet by its streams supplied.
  In depth of hue the flood did perse excel,
    And we, with this dim stream to lead us on,
    Descended by a pathway terrible.
  A marsh which by the name of Styx is known,
    Fed by this gloomy brook, lies at the base
    Of threatening cliffs hewn out of cold grey stone.
  And I, intent on study of the place,
    Saw people in that ditch, mud-smeared. In it                   110
    All naked stood with anger-clouded face.
  Nor with their fists alone each fiercely hit
    The other, but with feet and chest and head,
    And with their teeth to shreds each other bit.
  'Son, now behold,' the worthy Master said,
    'The souls of those whom anger made a prize;
    And, further, I would have thee certified
  That 'neath the water people utter sighs,
    And make the bubbles to the surface come;
    As thou mayst see by casting round thine eyes.                 120
  Fixed in the mud they say: "We lived in gloom
    In the sweet air made jocund by the day,
    Nursing within us melancholy fume.
  In this black mud we now our gloom display."
    This hymn with gurgling throats they strive to sound,
    Which they in speech unbroken fail to say.'
  And thus about the loathsome pool we wound
    For a wide arc, between the dry and soft,
    With eyes on those who gulp the filth, turned round.
  At last we reached a tower that soared aloft.                    130


CANTO VIII.


  I say, continuing, that long before
    To its foundations we approachèd nigh
    Our eyes went travelling to the top of the tower;
  For, hung out there, two flames we could espy.
    Then at such distance, scarce our eyesight made
    It clearly out, another gave reply.
  And, to the Sea of Knowledge turned, I said:
    'What meaneth this? and what reply would yield
    That other light, and who have it displayed?'
  'Thou shouldst upon the impure watery field,'                     10
    He said, 'already what approaches know,
    But that the fen-fog holds it still concealed.'
  Never was arrow yet from sharp-drawn bow
    Urged through the air upon a swifter flight
    Than what I saw a tiny vessel show,
  Across the water shooting into sight;
    A single pilot served it for a crew,
    Who shouted: 'Art thou come, thou guilty sprite?'
  'O Phlegyas, Phlegyas, this thy loud halloo!
    For once,' my Lord said, 'idle is and vain.                     20
    Thou hast us only till the mud we're through.'
  And, as one cheated inly smarts with pain
    When the deceit wrought on him is betrayed,
    His gathering ire could Phlegyas scarce contain.
  Into the bark my Leader stepped, and made
    Me take my place beside him; nor a jot,
    Till I had entered, was it downward weighed.
  Soon as my Guide and I were in the boat,
    To cleave the flood began the ancient prow,
    Deeper than 'tis with others wont to float.                30
  Then, as the stagnant ditch we glided through,
    One smeared with filth in front of me arose
    And said: 'Thus coming ere thy period, who
  Art thou?' And I: 'As one who forthwith goes
    I come; but thou defiled, how name they thee?'
    'I am but one who weeps,' he said. 'With woes,'
  I answered him, 'with tears and misery,
    Accursèd soul, remain; for thou art known
    Unto me now, all filthy though thou be.'
  Then both his hands were on the vessel thrown;                    40
    But him my wary Master backward heaved,
    Saying: 'Do thou 'mong the other dogs be gone!'
  Then to my neck with both his arms he cleaved,
    And kissed my face, and, 'Soul disdainful,' said,
    'O blessed she in whom thou wast conceived!
  He in the world great haughtiness displayed.
    No deeds of worth his memory adorn;
    And therefore rages here his sinful shade.
  And many are there by whom crowns are worn
    On earth, shall wallow here like swine in mire,                 50
    Leaving behind them names o'erwhelmed in scorn.'
  And I: 'O Master, I have great desire
    To see him well soused in this filthy tide,
    Ere from the lake we finally retire.'
  And he: 'Or ever shall have been descried
    The shore by thee, thy longing shall be met;
    For such a wish were justly gratified.'
  A little after in such fierce onset
    The miry people down upon him bore,
    I praise and bless God for it even yet.                         60
  'Philip Argenti! at him!' was the roar;
    And then that furious spirit Florentine
    Turned with his teeth upon himself and tore.
  Here was he left, nor wins more words of mine.
    Now in my ears a lamentation rung,
    Whence I to search what lies ahead begin.
  And the good Master told me: 'Son, ere long
    We to the city called of Dis draw near,
    Where in great armies cruel burghers throng.'
  And I: 'Already, Master, I appear                                 70
    Mosques in the valley to distinguish well,
    Vermilion, as if they from furnace were
  Fresh come.' And he: 'Fires everlasting dwell
    Within them, whence appear they glowing hot,
    As thou discernest in this lower hell.'
  We to the moat profound at length were brought,
    Which girds that city all disconsolate;
    The walls around it seemed of iron wrought.
  Not without fetching first a compass great,
    We came to where with angry cry at last:                        80
    'Get out,' the boatman yelled; 'behold the gate!'
  More than a thousand, who from Heaven were cast,
    I saw above the gates, who furiously
    Demanded: 'Who, ere death on him has passed,
  Holds through the region of the dead his way?'
    And my wise Master made to them a sign
    That he had something secretly to say.
  Then ceased they somewhat from their great disdain,
    And said: 'Come thou, but let that one be gone
    Who thus presumptuous enters on this reign.                     90
  Let him retrace his madcap way alone,
    If he but can; thou meanwhile lingering here,
    Through such dark regions who hast led him down.'
  Judge, reader, if I was not filled with fear,
    Hearing the words of this accursèd threat;
    For of return my hopes extinguished were.
  'Beloved Guide, who more than seven times set
    Me in security, and safely brought
    Through frightful dangers in my progress met,
  Leave me not thus undone;' I him besought:                       100
    'If further progress be to us denied,
    Let us retreat together, tarrying not.'
  The Lord who led me thither then replied:
    'Fear not: by One so great has been assigned
    Our passage, vainly were all hindrance tried.
  Await me here, and let thy fainting mind
    Be comforted and with good hope be fed,
    Not to be left in this low world behind.'
  Thus goes he, thus am I abandonèd
    By my sweet Father. I in doubt remain,                         110
    With Yes and No contending in my head.
  I could not hear what speech he did maintain,
    But no long time conferred he in that place,
    Till, to be first, all inward raced again.
  And then the gates were closed in my Lord's face
    By these our enemies; outside stood he;
    Then backward turned to me with lingering pace,
  With downcast eyes, and all the bravery
    Stripped from his brows; and he exclaimed with sighs;
    'Who dare deny the doleful seats to me!'                  120
  And then he said: 'Although my wrath arise,
    Fear not, for I to victory will pursue,
    Howe'er within they plot, the enterprise.
  This arrogance of theirs is nothing new;
    They showed it once at a less secret door
    Which stands unbolted since. Thou didst it view,
  And saw the dark-writ legend which it bore.
    Thence, even now, is one who hastens down
    Through all the circles, guideless, to this shore,
  And he shall win us entrance to the town.'                       130


CANTO IX.


  The hue which cowardice on my face did paint
    When I beheld my guide return again,
    Put his new colour quicker 'neath restraint.
  Like one who listens did he fixed remain;
    For far to penetrate the air like night,
    And heavy mist, the eye was bent in vain.
  'Yet surely we must vanquish in the fight;'
    Thus he, 'unless--but with such proffered aid--
    O how I weary till he come in sight!'
  Well I remarked how he transition made,                           10
    Covering his opening words with those behind,
    Which contradicted what at first he said.
  Nath'less his speech with terror charged my mind,
    For, haply, to the word which broken fell
    Worse meaning than he purposed, I assigned.
  Down to this bottom of the dismal shell
    Comes ever any from the First Degree,
    Where all their pain is, stripped of hope to dwell?
  To this my question thus responded he:
    'Seldom it haps to any to pursue                                20
    The journey now embarked upon by me.
  Yet I ere this descended, it is true,
    Beneath a spell of dire Erichtho's laid,
    Who could the corpse with soul inform anew.
  Short while my flesh of me was empty made
    When she required me to o'erpass that wall,
    From Judas' circle to abstract a shade.
  That is the deepest, darkest place of all,
    And furthest from the heaven which moves the skies;
    I know the way; fear nought that can befall.                    30
  These fens from which vile exhalations rise
    The doleful city all around invest,
    Which now we reach not save in angry wise.'
  Of more he spake nought in my mind doth rest,
    For, with mine eyes, my every thought had been
    Fixed on the lofty tower with flaming crest,
  Where, in a moment and upright, were seen
    Three hellish furies, all with blood defaced,
    And woman-like in members and in mien.
  Hydras of brilliant green begirt their waist;                     40
    Snakes and cerastes for their tresses grew,
    And these were round their dreadful temples braced.
  That they the drudges were, full well he knew,
    Of her who is the queen of endless woes,
    And said to me: 'The fierce Erynnyes view!
  Herself upon the left Megæra shows;
    That is Alecto weeping on the right;
    Tisiphone's between.' Here made he close.
  Each with her nails her breast tore, and did smite
    Herself with open palms. They screamed in tone                  50
    So fierce, I to the Poet clove for fright.
  'Medusa, come, that we may make him stone!'
    All shouted as they downward gazed; 'Alack!
    Theseus escaped us when he ventured down.'
  'Keep thine eyes closed and turn to them thy back,
    For if the Gorgon chance to be displayed
    And thou shouldst look, farewell the upward track!'
  Thus spake the Master, and himself he swayed
    Me round about; nor put he trust in mine
    But his own hands upon mine eyelids laid.                       60
  O ye with judgment gifted to divine
    Look closely now, and mark what hidden lore
    Lies 'neath the veil of my mysterious line!
  Across the turbid waters came a roar
    And crash of sound, which big with fear arose:
    Because of it fell trembling either shore.
  The fashion of it was as when there blows
    A blast by cross heats made to rage amain,
    Which smites the forest and without repose
  The shattered branches sweeps in hurricane;                       70
    In clouds of dust, majestic, onward flies,
    Wild beasts and herdsmen driving o'er the plain.
  'Sharpen thy gaze,' he bade--and freed mine eyes--
    'Across the foam-flecked immemorial lake,
    Where sourest vapour most unbroken lies.'
  And as the frogs before the hostile snake
    Together of the water get them clear,
    And on the dry ground, huddling, shelter take;
  More than a thousand ruined souls in fear
    Beheld I flee from one who, dry of feet,                        80
    Was by the Stygian ferry drawing near.
  Waving his left hand he the vapour beat
    Swiftly from 'fore his face, nor seemed he spent
    Save with fatigue at having this to meet.
  Well I opined that he from Heaven was sent,
    And to my Master turned. His gesture taught
    I should be dumb and in obeisance bent.
  Ah me, how with disdain appeared he fraught!
    He reached the gate, which, touching with a rod,
    He oped with ease, for it resisted not.                         90
  'People despised and banished far from God,'
    Upon the awful threshold then he spoke,
    'How holds in you such insolence abode?
  Why kick against that will which never broke
    Short of its end, if ever it begin,
    And often for you fiercer torments woke?
  Butting 'gainst fate, what can ye hope to win?
    Your Cerberus, as is to you well known,
    Still bears for this a well-peeled throat and chin.'
  Then by the passage foul he back was gone,                       100
    Nor spake to us, but like a man was he
    By other cares absorbed and driven on
  Than that of those who may around him be.
    And we, confiding in the sacred word,
    Moved toward the town in all security.
  We entered without hindrance, and I, spurred
    By my desire the character to know
    And style of place such strong defences gird,
  Entering, begin mine eyes around to throw,
    And see on every hand a vast champaign,                        110
    The teeming seat of torments and of woe.
  And as at Arles where Rhone spreads o'er the plain,
    Or Pola, hard upon Quarnaro sound
    Which bathes the boundaries Italian,
  The sepulchres uneven make the ground;
    So here on every side, but far more dire
    And grievous was the fashion of them found.
  For scattered 'mid the tombs blazed many a fire,
    Because of which these with such fervour burned
    No arts which work in iron more require.                       120
  All of the lids were lifted. I discerned
    By keen laments which from the tombs arose
    That sad and suffering ones were there inurned.
  I said: 'O Master, tell me who are those
    Buried within the tombs, of whom the sighs
    Come to our ears thus eloquent of woes?'
  And he to me: 'The lords of heresies
    With followers of all sects, a greater band
    Than thou wouldst think, these sepulchres comprise.
  To lodge them like to like the tombs are planned.                130
    The sepulchres have more or less of heat.'
    Then passed we, turning to the dexter hand,
  'Tween torments and the lofty parapet.


CANTO X.


  And now advance we by a narrow track
    Between the torments and the ramparts high,
    My Master first, and I behind his back.
  'O mighty Virtue, at whose will am I
    Wheeled through these impious circles,' then I said,
    'Speak, and in full my longing satisfy.
  The people who within the tombs are laid,
    May they be seen? The coverings are all thrown
    Open, nor is there any guard displayed.'
  And he to me: 'All shall be fastened down                         10
    When hither from Jehoshaphat they come
    Again in bodies which were once their own.
  All here with Epicurus find their tomb
    Who are his followers, and by whom 'tis held
    That the soul shares the body's mortal doom.
  Things here discovered then shall answer yield,
    And quickly, to thy question asked of me;
    As well as to the wish thou hast concealed.'
  And I: 'Good Leader, if I hide from thee
    My heart, it is that I may little say;                          20
    Nor only now learned I thus dumb to be.'
  'O Tuscan, who, still living, mak'st thy way,
    Modest of speech, through the abode of flame,
    Be pleased a little in this place to stay.
  The accents of thy language thee proclaim
    To be a native of that state renowned
    Which I, perchance, wronged somewhat.' Sudden came
  These words from out a tomb which there was found
    'Mongst others; whereon I, compelled by fright,
    A little toward my Leader shifted ground.                       30
  And he: 'Turn round, what ails thee? Lo! upright
    Beginneth Farinata to arise;
    All of him 'bove the girdle comes in sight.'
  On him already had I fixed mine eyes.
    Towering erect with lifted front and chest,
    He seemed Inferno greatly to despise.
  And toward him I among the tombs was pressed
    By my Guide's nimble and courageous hand,
    While he, 'Choose well thy language,' gave behest.
  Beneath his tomb when I had ta'en my stand                        40
    Regarding me a moment, 'Of what house
    Art thou?' as if in scorn, he made demand.
  To show myself obedient, anxious,
    I nothing hid, but told my ancestors;
    And, listening, he gently raised his brows.
  'Fiercely to me they proved themselves adverse,
    And to my sires and party,' then he said;
    'Because of which I did them twice disperse.'
  I answered him: 'And what although they fled!
    Twice from all quarters they returned with might,               50
    An art not mastered yet by these you led.'
  Beside him then there issued into sight
    Another shade, uncovered to the chin,
    Propped on his knees, if I surmised aright.
  He peered around as if he fain would win
    Knowledge if any other was with me;
    And then, his hope all spent, did thus begin,
  Weeping: 'By dint of genius if it be
    Thou visit'st this dark prison, where my son?
    And wherefore not found in thy company?'                        60
  And I to him: 'I come not here alone:
    He waiting yonder guides me: but disdain
    Of him perchance was by your Guido shown.'
  The words he used, and manner of his pain,
    Revealed his name to me beyond surmise;
    Hence was I able thus to answer plain.
  Then cried he, and at once upright did rise,
    'How saidst thou--was? Breathes he not then the air?
    The pleasant light no longer smites his eyes?'
  When he of hesitation was aware                                   70
    Displayed by me in forming my reply,
    He fell supine, no more to reappear.
  But the magnanimous, at whose bidding I
    Had halted there, the same expression wore,
    Nor budged a jot, nor turned his neck awry.
  'And if'--resumed he where he paused before--
    'They be indeed but slow that art to learn,
    Than this my bed, to hear it pains me more.
  But ere the fiftieth time anew shall burn
    The lady's face who reigneth here below,                   80
    Of that sore art thou shalt experience earn.
  And as to the sweet world again thou'dst go,
    Tell me, why is that people so without
    Ruth for my race, as all their statutes show?'
  And I to him: 'The slaughter and the rout
    Which made the Arbia to run with red,
    Cause in our fane such prayers to be poured out.'
  Whereon he heaved a sigh and shook his head:
    'There I was not alone, nor to embrace
    That cause was I, without good reason, led.                     90
  But there I was alone, when from her place
    All granted Florence should be swept away.
    'Twas I defended her with open face.'
  'So may your seed find peace some better day,'
    I urged him, 'as this knot you shall untie
    In which my judgment doth entangled stay.
  If I hear rightly, ye, it seems, descry
    Beforehand what time brings, and yet ye seem
    'Neath other laws as touching what is nigh.'
  'Like those who see best what is far from them,                  100
    We see things,' said he, 'which afar remain;
    Thus much enlightened by the Guide Supreme.
  To know them present or approaching, vain
    Are all our powers; and save what they relate
    Who hither come, of earth no news we gain.
  Hence mayst thou gather in how dead a state
    Shall all our knowledge from that time be thrown
    When of the future shall be closed the gate.'
  Then, for my fault as if repentant grown,
    I said: 'Report to him who fell supine,                        110
    That still among the living breathes his son.
  And if I, dumb, seemed answer to decline,
    Tell him it was that I upon the knot
    Was pondering then, you helped me to untwine.'
  Me now my Master called, whence I besought
    With more than former sharpness of the shade,
    To tell me what companions he had got.
  He answered me: 'Some thousand here are laid
    With me; 'mong these the Second Frederick,
    The Cardinal too; of others nought be said.'              120
  Then was he hid; and towards the Bard antique
    I turned my steps, revolving in my brain
    The ominous words which I had heard him speak.
  He moved, and as we onward went again
    Demanded of me: 'Wherefore thus amazed?'
    And to his question I made answer plain.
  'Within thy mind let there be surely placed,'
    The Sage bade, 'what 'gainst thee thou heardest say.
    Now mark me well' (his finger here he raised),
  'When thou shalt stand within her gentle ray                     130
    Whose beauteous eye sees all, she will make known
    The stages of thy journey on life's way.'
  Turning his feet, he to the left moved on;
    Leaving the wall, we to the middle went
    Upon a path that to a vale strikes down,
  Which even to us above its foulness sent.



CANTO XI.


  We at the margin of a lofty steep
    Made of great shattered stones in circle bent,
    Arrived where worser torments crowd the deep.
  So horrible a stench and violent
    Was upward wafted from the vast abyss,
    Behind the cover we for shelter went
  Of a great tomb where I saw written this:
    'Pope Anastasius is within me thrust,
    Whom the straight way Photinus made to miss.'
  'Now on our course a while we linger must,'                       10
    The Master said, 'be but our sense resigned
    A little to it, and the filthy gust
  We shall not heed.' Then I: 'Do thou but find
    Some compensation lest our time should run
    Wasted.' And he: 'Behold, 'twas in my mind.
  Girt by the rocks before us, O my son,
    Lie three small circles,' he began to tell,
    'Graded like those with which thou now hast done,
  All of them filled with spirits miserable.
    That sight of them may thee henceforth suffice.            20
    Hear how and wherefore in these groups they dwell.
  Whate'er in Heaven's abhorred as wickedness
    Has injury for its end; in others' bane
    By fraud resulting or in violent wise.
  Since fraud to man alone doth appertain,
    God hates it most; and hence the fraudulent band,
    Set lowest down, endure a fiercer pain.
  Of the violent is the circle next at hand
    To us; and since three ways is violence shown,
    'Tis in three several circuits built and planned.               30
  To God, ourselves, or neighbours may be done
    Violence, or on the things by them possessed;
    As reasoning clear shall unto thee make known.
  Our neighbour may by violence be distressed
    With grievous wounds, or slain; his goods and lands
    By havoc, fire, and plunder be oppressed.
  Hence those who wound and slay with violent hands,
    Robbers, and spoilers, in the nearest round
    Are all tormented in their various bands.
  Violent against himself may man be found,                         40
    And 'gainst his goods; therefore without avail
    They in the next are in repentance drowned
  Who on themselves loss of your world entail,
    Who gamble and their substance madly spend,
    And who when called to joy lament and wail.
  And even to God may violence extend
    By heart denial and by blasphemy,
    Scorning what nature doth in bounty lend.
  Sodom and Cahors hence are doomed to lie
    Within the narrowest circlet surely sealed;                     50
    And such as God within their hearts defy.
  Fraud, 'gainst whose bite no conscience findeth shield,
    A man may use with one who in him lays
    Trust, or with those who no such credence yield.
  Beneath this latter kind of it decays
    The bond of love which out of nature grew;
    Hence, in the second circle herd the race
  To feigning given and flattery, who pursue
    Magic, false coining, theft, and simony,
    Pimps, barrators, and suchlike residue.                         60
  The other form of fraud makes nullity
    Of natural bonds; and, what is more than those,
    The special trust whence men on men rely.
  Hence in the place whereon all things repose,
    The narrowest circle and the seat of Dis,
    Each traitor's gulfed in everlasting woes.'
  'Thy explanation, Master, as to this
    Is clear,' I said, 'and thou hast plainly told
    Who are the people stowed in the abyss.
  But tell why those the muddy marshes hold,                        70
    The tempest-driven, those beaten by the rain,
    And such as, meeting, virulently scold,
  Are not within the crimson city ta'en
    For punishment, if hateful unto God;
    And, if not hateful, wherefore doomed to pain?'
  And he to me: 'Why wander thus abroad,
    More than is wont, thy wits? or how engrossed
    Is now thy mind, and on what things bestowed?
  Hast thou the memory of the passage lost
    In which thy Ethics for their subject treat                80
    Of the three moods by Heaven abhorred the most--
  Malice and bestiality complete;
    And how, compared with these, incontinence
    Offends God less, and lesser blame doth meet?
  If of this doctrine thou extract the sense,
    And call to memory what people are
    Above, outside, in endless penitence,
  Why from these guilty they are sundered far
    Thou shalt discern, and why on them alight
    The strokes of justice in less angry war.'                      90
  'O Sun that clearest every troubled sight,
    So charmed am I by thy resolving speech,
    Doubt yields me joy no less than knowing right.
  Therefore, I pray, a little backward reach,'
    I asked, 'to where thou say'st that usury
    Sins 'gainst God's bounty; and this mystery teach.'
  He said: 'Who gives ear to Philosophy
    Is taught by her, nor in one place alone,
    What nature in her course is governed by,
  Even Mind Divine, and art which thence hath grown;               100
    And if thy Physics thou wilt search within,
    Thou'lt find ere many leaves are open thrown,
  This art by yours, far as your art can win,
    Is followed close--the teacher by the taught;
    As grandchild then to God your art is kin.
  And from these two--do thou recall to thought
    How Genesis begins--should come supplies
    Of food for man, and other wealth be sought.
  And, since another plan the usurer plies,
    Nature and nature's child have his disdain;               110
    Because on other ground his hope relies.
  But come, for to advance I now am fain:
    The Fishes over the horizon line
    Quiver; o'er Caurus now stands all the Wain;
  And further yonder does the cliff decline.'



CANTO XII.


  The place of our descent before us lay
    Precipitous, and there was something more
    From sight of which all eyes had turned away.
  As at the ruin which upon the shore
    Of Adige fell upon this side of Trent--
    Through earthquake or by slip of what before
  Upheld it--from the summit whence it went
    Far as the plain, the shattered rocks supply
    Some sort of foothold to who makes descent;
  Such was the passage down the precipice high.                     10
    And on the riven gully's very brow
    Lay spread at large the Cretan Infamy
  Which was conceived in the pretended cow.
    Us when he saw, he bit himself for rage
    Like one whose anger gnaws him through and through.
  'Perhaps thou deemest,' called to him the Sage,
    'This is the Duke of Athens drawing nigh,
    Who war to the death with thee on earth did wage.
  Begone, thou brute, for this one passing by
    Untutored by thy sister has thee found,                         20
    And only comes thy sufferings to spy,'
  And as the bull which snaps what held it bound
    On being smitten by the fatal blow,
    Halts in its course, and reels upon the ground,
  The Minotaur I saw reel to and fro;
    And he, the alert, cried: 'To the passage haste;
    While yet he chafes 'twere well thou down shouldst go.'
  So we descended by the slippery waste
    Of shivered stones which many a time gave way
    'Neath the new weight my feet upon them placed.            30
  I musing went; and he began to say:
    'Perchance this ruined slope thou thinkest on,
    Watched by the brute rage I did now allay.
  But I would have thee know, when I came down
    The former time into this lower Hell,
    The cliff had not this ruin undergone.
  It was not long, if I distinguish well,
    Ere He appeared who wrenched great prey from Dis
    From out the upmost circle. Trembling fell
  Through all its parts the nauseous abyss                          40
    With such a violence, the world, I thought,
    Was stirred by love; for, as they say, by this
  She back to Chaos has been often brought.
    And then it was this ancient rampart strong
    Was shattered here and at another spot.
  But toward the valley look. We come ere long
    Down to the river of blood where boiling lie
    All who by violence work others wrong.'
  O insane rage! O blind cupidity!
    By which in our brief life we are so spurred,                   50
    Ere downward plunged in evil case for aye!
  An ample ditch I now beheld engird
    And sweep in circle all around the plain,
    As from my Escort I had lately heard.
  Between this and the rock in single train
    Centaurs were running who were armed with bows,
    As if they hunted on the earth again.
  Observing us descend they all stood close,
    Save three of them who parted from the band
    With bow, and arrows they in coming chose.                      60
  'What torment,' from afar one made demand,
    'Come ye to share, who now descend the hill?
    I shoot unless ye answer whence ye stand.'
  My Master said: 'We yield no answer till
    We come to Chiron standing at thy side;
    But thy quick temper always served thee ill.'
  Then touching me: ''Tis Nessus; he who died
    With love for beauteous Dejanire possessed,
    And who himself his own vendetta plied.
  He in the middle, staring on his breast,                          70
    Is mighty Chiron, who Achilles bred;
    And next the wrathful Pholus. They invest
  The fosse and in their thousands round it tread,
    Shooting whoever from the blood shall lift,
    More than his crime allows, his guilty head.'
  As we moved nearer to those creatures swift
    Chiron drew forth a shaft and dressed his beard
    Back on his jaws, using the arrow's cleft.
  And when his ample mouth of hair was cleared,
    He said to his companions: 'Have ye seen                        80
    The things the second touches straight are stirred,
  As they by feet of shades could ne'er have been?'
    And my good Guide, who to his breast had gone--
    The part where join the natures, 'Well I ween
  He lives,' made answer; 'and if, thus alone,
    He seeks the valley dim 'neath my control,
    Necessity, not pleasure, leads him on.
  One came from where the alleluiahs roll,
    Who charged me with this office strange and new:
    No robber he, nor mine a felon soul.                            90
  But, by that Power which makes me to pursue
    The rugged journey whereupon I fare,
    Accord us one of thine to keep in view,
  That he may show where lies the ford, and bear
    This other on his back to yonder strand;
    No spirit he, that he should cleave the air.'
  Wheeled to the right then Chiron gave command
    To Nessus: 'Turn, and lead them, and take tent
    They be not touched by any other band.'
  We with our trusty Escort forward went,                          100
    Threading the margin of the boiling blood
    Where they who seethed were raising loud lament.
  People I saw up to the chin imbrued,
    'These all are tyrants,' the great Centaur said,
    'Who blood and plunder for their trade pursued.
  Here for their pitiless deeds tears now are shed
    By Alexander, and Dionysius fell,
    Through whom in Sicily dolorous years were led.
  The forehead with black hair so terrible
    Is Ezzelino; that one blond of hue,                       110
    Obizzo d'Este, whom, as rumours tell,
  His stepson murdered, and report speaks true.'
    I to the Poet turned, who gave command:
    'Regard thou chiefly him. I follow you.'
  Ere long the Centaur halted on the strand,
    Close to a people who, far as the throat,
    Forth of that bulicamë seemed to stand.
  Thence a lone shade to us he pointed out
    Saying: 'In God's house ran he weapon through
    The heart which still on Thames wins cult devout.'             120
  Then I saw people, some with heads in view,
    And some their chests above the river bore;
    And many of them I, beholding, knew.
  And thus the blood went dwindling more and more,
    Until at last it covered but the feet:
    Here took we passage to the other shore.
  'As on this hand thou seest still abate
    In depth the volume of the boiling stream,'
    The Centaur said, 'so grows its depth more great,
  Believe me, towards the opposite extreme,                        130
    Until again its circling course attains
    The place where tyrants must lament. Supreme
  Justice upon that side involves in pains,
    With Attila, once of the world the pest,
    Pyrrhus and Sextus: and for ever drains
  Tears out of Rinier of Corneto pressed
    And Rinier Pazzo in that boiling mass,
    Whose brigandage did so the roads infest.'
  Then turned he back alone, the ford to pass.


CANTO XIII.


  Ere Nessus landed on the other shore
    We for our part within a forest drew,
    Which of no pathway any traces bore.
  Not green the foliage, but of dusky hue;
    Not smooth the boughs, but gnarled and twisted round;
    For apples, poisonous thorns upon them grew.
  No rougher brakes or matted worse are found
    Where savage beasts betwixt Corneto roam
    And Cecina, abhorring cultured ground.
  The loathsome Harpies nestle here at home,                   10
    Who from the Strophades the Trojans chased
    With dire predictions of a woe to come.
  Great winged are they, but human necked and faced,
    With feathered belly, and with claw for toe;
    They shriek upon the bushes wild and waste.
  'Ere passing further, I would have thee know,'
    The worthy Master thus began to say,
    'Thou'rt in the second round, nor hence shalt go
  Till by the horrid sand thy footsteps stay.
    Give then good heed, and things thou'lt recognise               20
    That of my words will prove the verity.'
  Wailings on every side I heard arise:
    Of who might raise them I distinguished nought;
    Whereon I halted, smitten with surprise.
  I think he thought that haply 'twas my thought
    The voices came from people 'mong the trees,
    Who, to escape us, hiding-places sought;
  Wherefore the Master said: 'From one of these
    Snap thou a twig, and thou shalt understand
    How little with thy thought the fact agrees.'                   30
  Thereon a little I stretched forth my hand
    And plucked a tiny branch from a great thorn.
    'Why dost thou tear me?' made the trunk demand.
  When dark with blood it had begun to turn,
    It cried a second time: 'Why wound me thus?
    Doth not a spark of pity in thee burn?
  Though trees we be, once men were all of us;
    Yet had our souls the souls of serpents been
    Thy hand might well have proved more piteous.'
  As when the fire hath seized a fagot green                        40
    At one extremity, the other sighs,
    And wind, escaping, hisses; so was seen,
  At where the branch was broken, blood to rise
    And words were mixed with it. I dropped the spray
    And stood like one whom terror doth surprise.
  The Sage replied: 'Soul vexed with injury,
    Had he been only able to give trust
    To what he read narrated in my lay,
  His hand toward thee would never have been thrust.
    'Tis hard for faith; and I, to make it plain,                   50
    Urged him to trial, mourn it though I must.
  But tell him who thou wast; so shall remain
    This for amends to thee, thy fame shall blow
    Afresh on earth, where he returns again.'
  And then the trunk: 'Thy sweet words charm me so,
    I cannot dumb remain; nor count it hard
    If I some pains upon my speech bestow.
  For I am he who held both keys in ward
    Of Frederick's heart, and turned them how I would,
    And softly oped it, and as softly barred,                       60
  Till scarce another in his counsel stood.
    To my high office I such loyalty bore,
    It cost me sleep and haleness of my blood.
  The harlot who removeth nevermore
    From Cæsar's house eyes ignorant of shame--
    A common curse, of courts the special sore--
  Set against me the minds of all aflame,
    And these in turn Augustus set on fire,
    Till my glad honours bitter woes became.
  My soul, filled full with a disdainful ire,                       70
    Thinking by means of death disdain to flee,
    'Gainst my just self unjustly did conspire.
  I swear even by the new roots of this tree
    My fealty to my lord I never broke,
    For worthy of all honour sure was he.
  If one of you return 'mong living folk,
    Let him restore my memory, overthrown
    And suffering yet because of envy's stroke.'
  Still for a while the poet listened on,
    Then said: 'Now he is dumb, lose not the hour,                  80
    But make request if more thou'dst have made known.'
  And I replied: 'Do thou inquire once more
    Of what thou thinkest I would gladly know;
    I cannot ask; ruth wrings me to the core.'
  On this he spake: 'Even as the man shall do,
    And liberally, what thou of him hast prayed,
    Imprisoned spirit, do thou further show
  How with these knots the spirits have been made
    Incorporate; and, if thou canst, declare
    If from such members e'er is loosed a shade.'                   90
  Then from the trunk came vehement puffs of air;
    Next, to these words converted was the wind:
    'My answer to you shall be short and clear.
  When the fierce soul no longer is confined
    In flesh, torn thence by action of its own,
    To the Seventh Depth by Minos 'tis consigned.
  No choice is made of where it shall be thrown
    Within the wood; but where by chance 'tis flung
    It germinates like seed of spelt that's sown.
  A forest tree it grows from sapling young;                       100
    Eating its leaves, the Harpies cause it pain,
    And open loopholes whence its sighs are wrung.
  We for our vestments shall return again
    Like others, but in them shall ne'er be clad:
    Men justly lose what from themselves they've ta'en.
  Dragged hither by us, all throughout the sad
    Forest our bodies shall be hung on high;
    Each on the thorn of its destructive shade.'
  While to the trunk we listening lingered nigh,
    Thinking he might proceed to tell us more,                     110
    A sudden uproar we were startled by
  Like him who, that the huntsman and the boar
    To where he stands are sweeping in the chase,
    Knows by the crashing trees and brutish roar.
  Upon our left we saw a couple race
    Naked and scratched; and they so quickly fled
    The forest barriers burst before their face.
  'Speed to my rescue, death!' the foremost pled.
    The next, as wishing he could use more haste;
    'Not thus, O Lano, thee thy legs bested                   120
  When one at Toppo's tournament thou wast.'
    Then, haply wanting breath, aside he stepped,
    Merged with a bush on which himself he cast.
  Behind them through the forest onward swept
    A pack of dogs, black, ravenous, and fleet,
    Like greyhounds from their leashes newly slipped.
  In him who crouched they made their teeth to meet,
    And, having piecemeal all his members rent,
    Haled them away enduring anguish great.
  Grasping my hand, my Escort forward went                         130
    And led me to the bush which, all in vain,
    Through its ensanguined openings made lament.
  'James of St. Andrews,' it we heard complain;
    'What profit hadst thou making me thy shield?
    For thy bad life doth blame to me pertain?'
  Then, halting there, this speech my Master held:
    'Who wast thou that through many wounds dost sigh,
    Mingled with blood, words big with sorrow swelled?'
  'O souls that hither come,' was his reply,
    'To witness shameful outrage by me borne,                      140
    Whence all my leaves torn off around me lie,
  Gather them to the root of this drear thorn.
    My city for the Baptist changed of yore
    Her former patron; wherefore, in return,
  He with his art will make her aye deplore;
    And were it not some image doth remain
    Of him where Arno's crossed from shore to shore,
  Those citizens who founded her again
    On ashes left by Attila, had spent
    Their labour of a surety all in vain.                          150
  In my own house I up a gibbet went.'



CANTO XIV.


  Me of my native place the dear constraint
    Led to restore the leaves which round were strewn,
    To him whose voice by this time was grown faint.
  Thence came we where the second round joins on
    Unto the third, wherein how terrible
    The art of justice can be, is well shown.
  But, clearly of these wondrous things to tell,
    I say we entered on a plain of sand
    Which from its bed doth every plant repel.
  The dolorous wood lies round it like a band,                      10
    As that by the drear fosse is circled round.
    Upon its very edge we came to a stand.
  And there was nothing within all that bound
    But burnt and heavy sand; like that once trod
    Beneath the feet of Cato was the ground.
  Ah, what a terror, O revenge of God!
    Shouldst thou awake in any that may read
    Of what before mine eyes was spread abroad.
  I of great herds of naked souls took heed.
    Most piteously was weeping every one;                           20
    And different fortunes seemed to them decreed.
  For some of them upon the ground lay prone,
    And some were sitting huddled up and bent,
    While others, restless, wandered up and down.
  More numerous were they that roaming went
    Than they that were tormented lying low;
    But these had tongues more loosened to lament.
  O'er all the sand, deliberate and slow,
    Broad open flakes of fire were downward rained,
    As 'mong the Alps in calm descends the snow.               30
  Such Alexander saw when he attained
    The hottest India; on his host they fell
    And all unbroken on the earth remained;
  Wherefore he bade his phalanxes tread well
    The ground, because when taken one by one
    The burning flakes they could the better quell.
  So here eternal fire was pouring down;
    As tinder 'neath the steel, so here the sands
    Kindled, whence pain more vehement was known.
  And, dancing up and down, the wretched hands                 40
    Beat here and there for ever without rest;
    Brushing away from them the falling brands.
  And I: 'O Master, by all things confessed
    Victor, except by obdurate evil powers
    Who at the gate to stop our passage pressed,
  Who is the enormous one who noway cowers
    Beneath the fire; with fierce disdainful air
    Lying as if untortured by the showers?'
  And that same shade, because he was aware
    That touching him I of my Guide was fain                        50
    To learn, cried: 'As in life, myself I bear
  In death. Though Jupiter should tire again
    His smith, from whom he snatched in angry bout
    The bolt by which I at the last was slain;
  Though one by one he tire the others out
    At the black forge in Mongibello placed,
    While "Ho, good Vulcan, help me!" he shall shout--
  The cry he once at Phlegra's battle raised;
    Though hurled with all his might at me shall fly
    His bolts, yet sweet revenge he shall not taste.'               60
  Then spake my Guide, and in a voice so high
    Never till then heard I from him such tone:
    'O Capaneus, because unquenchably
  Thy pride doth burn, worse pain by thee is known.
    Into no torture save thy madness wild
    Fit for thy fury couldest thou be thrown.'
  Then, to me turning with a face more mild,
    He said: 'Of the Seven Kings was he of old,
    Who leaguered Thebes, and as he God reviled
  Him in small reverence still he seems to hold;                    70
    But for his bosom his own insolence
    Supplies fit ornament, as now I told.
  Now follow; but take heed lest passing hence
    Thy feet upon the burning sand should tread;
    But keep them firm where runs the forest fence.'
  We reached a place--nor any word we said--
    Where issues from the wood a streamlet small;
    I shake but to recall its colour red.
  Like that which does from Bulicamë fall,
    And losel women later 'mong them share;                         80
    So through the sand this brooklet's waters crawl.
  Its bottom and its banks I was aware
    Were stone, and stone the rims on either side.
    From this I knew the passage must be there.
  'Of all that I have shown thee as thy guide
    Since when we by the gateway entered in,
    Whose threshold unto no one is denied,
  Nothing by thee has yet encountered been
    So worthy as this brook to cause surprise,
    O'er which the falling fire-flakes quenched are seen.'          90
  These were my Leader's words. For full supplies
    I prayed him of the food of which to taste
    Keen appetite he made within me rise.
  'In middle sea there lies a country waste,
    Known by the name of Crete,' I then was told,
    'Under whose king the world of yore was chaste.
  There stands a mountain, once the joyous hold
    Of woods and streams; as Ida 'twas renowned,
    Now 'tis deserted like a thing grown old.
  For a safe cradle 'twas by Rhea found.                           100
    To nurse her child in; and his infant cry,
  Lest it betrayed him, she with clamours drowned.
  Within the mount an old man towereth high.
    Towards Damietta are his shoulders thrown;
    On Rome, as on his mirror, rests his eye.
  His head is fashioned of pure gold alone;
    Of purest silver are his arms and chest;
    'Tis brass to where his legs divide; then down
  From that is all of iron of the best,
    Save the right foot, which is of baken clay;                   110
    And upon this foot doth he chiefly rest.
  Save what is gold, doth every part display
    A fissure dripping tears; these, gathering all
    Together, through the grotto pierce a way.
  From rock to rock into this deep they fall,
    Feed Acheron and Styx and Phlegethon,
    Then downward travelling by this strait canal,
  Far as the place where further slope is none,
    Cocytus form; and what that pool may be
    I say not now. Thou'lt see it further on.'                     120
  'If this brook rises,' he was asked by me,
    'Within our world, how comes it that no trace
    We saw of it till on this boundary?'
  And he replied: 'Thou knowest that the place
    Is round, and far as thou hast moved thy feet,
    Still to the left hand sinking to the base,
  Nath'less thy circuit is not yet complete.
    Therefore if something new we chance to spy,
    Amazement needs not on thy face have seat.'
  I then: 'But, Master, where doth Lethe lie,                      130
    And Phlegethon? Of that thou sayest nought;
    Of this thou say'st, those tears its flood supply.'
  'It likes me well to be by thee besought;
    But by the boiling red wave,' I was told,
    'To half thy question was an answer brought.
  Lethe, not in this pit, shalt thou behold.
    Thither to wash themselves the spirits go,
    When penitence has made them spotless souled.'
  Then said he: 'From the wood 'tis fitting now
    That we depart; behind me press thou nigh.                     140
    Keep we the margins, for they do not glow,
  And over them, ere fallen, the fire-flakes die.'


CANTO XV.


  Now lies our way along one of the margins hard;
    Steam rising from the rivulet forms a cloud,
    Which 'gainst the fire doth brook and borders guard.
  Like walls the Flemings, timorous of the flood
    Which towards them pours betwixt Bruges and Cadsand,
    Have made, that ocean's charge may be withstood;
  Or what the Paduans on the Brenta's strand
    To guard their castles and their homesteads rear,
    Ere Chiarentana feel the spring-tide bland;
  Of the same fashion did those dikes appear,                       10
    Though not so high he made them, nor so vast,
    Whoe'er the builder was that piled them here.
  We, from the wood when we so far had passed
    I should not have distinguished where it lay
    Though I to see it backward glance had cast,
  A group of souls encountered on the way,
    Whose line of march was to the margin nigh.
    Each looked at us--as by the new moon's ray
  Men peer at others 'neath the darkening sky--
    Sharpening his brows on us and only us,                         20
    Like an old tailor on his needle's eye.
  And while that crowd was staring at me thus,
    One of them knew me, caught me by the gown,
    And cried aloud: 'Lo, this is marvellous!'
  And straightway, while he thus to me held on,
    I fixed mine eyes upon his fire-baked face,
    And, spite of scorching, seemed his features known,
  And whose they were my memory well could trace;
    And I, with hand stretched toward his face below,
    Asked: 'Ser Brunetto! and is this your place?'             30
  'O son,' he answered, 'no displeasure show,
    If now Brunetto Latini shall some way
    Step back with thee, and leave his troop to go.'
  I said: 'With all my heart for this I pray,
    And, if you choose, I by your side will sit;
    If he, for I go with him, grant delay.'
  'Son,' said he, 'who of us shall intermit
    Motion a moment, for an age must lie
    Nor fan himself when flames are round him lit.
  On, therefore! At thy skirts I follow nigh,                       40
    Then shall I overtake my band again,
    Who mourn a loss large as eternity.'
  I dared not from the path step to the plain
    To walk with him, but low I bent my head,
    Like one whose steps are all with reverence ta'en.
  'What fortune or what destiny,' he said,
    'Hath brought thee here or e'er thou death hast seen;
    And who is this by whom thou'rt onward led?'
  'Up yonder,' said I, 'in the life serene,
    I in a valley wandered all forlorn                              50
    Before my years had full accomplished been.
  I turned my back on it but yestermorn;
    Again I sought it when he came in sight
    Guided by whom I homeward thus return.'
  And he to me: 'Following thy planet's light
    Thou of a glorious haven canst not fail,
    If in the blithesome life I marked aright.
  And had my years known more abundant tale,
    Seeing the heavens so held thee in their grace
    I, heartening thee, had helped thee to prevail.                 60
  But that ungrateful and malignant race
    Which down from Fiesole came long ago,
    And still its rocky origin betrays,
  Will for thy worthiness become thy foe;
    And with good reason, for 'mong crab-trees wild
    It ill befits the mellow fig to grow.
  By widespread ancient rumour are they styled
    A people blind, rapacious, envious, vain:
    See by their manners thou be not defiled.
  Fortune reserves such honour for thee, fain                       70
    Both sides will be to enlist thee in their need;
    But from the beak the herb shall far remain.
  Let beasts of Fiesole go on to tread
    Themselves to litter, nor the plants molest,
    If any such now spring on their rank bed,
  In whom there flourishes indeed the blest
    Seed of the Romans who still lingered there
    When of such wickedness 'twas made the nest.'
  'Had I obtained full answer to my prayer,
    You had not yet been doomed,' I then did say,                   80
    'This exile from humanity to bear.
  For deep within my heart and memory
    Lives the paternal image good and dear
    Of you, as in the world, from day to day,
  How men escape oblivion you made clear;
    My thankfulness for which shall in my speech
    While I have life, as it behoves, appear.
  I note what of my future course you teach.
    Stored with another text it will be glozed
    By one expert, should I that Lady reach.                        90
  Yet would I have this much to you disclosed:
    If but my conscience no reproaches yield,
    To all my fortune is my soul composed.
  Not new to me the hint by you revealed;
    Therefore let Fortune turn her wheel apace,
    Even as she will; the clown his mattock wield.'
  Thereon my Master right about did face,
    And uttered this, with glance upon me thrown:
    'He hears to purpose who doth mark the place.'
  And none the less I, speaking, still go on                       100
    With Ser Brunetto; asking him to tell
    Who of his band are greatest and best known.
  And he to me: 'To hear of some is well,
    But of the rest 'tis fitting to be dumb,
    And time is lacking all their names to spell.
  That all of them were clerks, know thou in sum,
    All men of letters, famous and of might;
    Stained with one sin all from the world are come.
  Priscian goes with that crowd of evil plight,
    Francis d'Accorso too; and hadst thou mind                110
    For suchlike trash thou mightest have had sight
  Of him the Slave of Slaves to change assigned
    From Arno's banks to Bacchiglione, where
    His nerves fatigued with vice he left behind.
  More would I say, but neither must I fare
    Nor talk at further length, for from the sand
    I see new dust-clouds rising in the air,
  I may not keep with such as are at hand.
    Care for my _Treasure_; for I still survive
    In that my work. I nothing else demand.'                       120
  Then turned he back, and ran like those who strive
    For the Green Cloth upon Verona's plain;
    And seemed like him that shall the first arrive,
  And not like him that labours all in vain.



CANTO XVI.


  Now could I hear the water as it fell
    To the next circle with a murmuring sound
    Like what is heard from swarming hives to swell;
  When three shades all together with a bound
    Burst from a troop met by us pressing on
    'Neath rain of that sharp torment. O'er the ground
  Toward us approaching, they exclaimed each one:
    'Halt thou, whom from thy garb we judge to be
    A citizen of our corrupted town.'
  Alas, what scars I on their limbs did see,                        10
    Both old and recent, which the flames had made:
    Even now my ruth is fed by memory.
  My Teacher halted at their cry, and said:
    'Await a while:' and looked me in the face;
    'Some courtesy to these were well displayed.
  And but that fire--the manner of the place--
    Descends for ever, fitting 'twere to find
    Rather than them, thee quickening thy pace.'
  When we had halted, they again combined
    In their old song; and, reaching where we stood,                20
    Into a wheel all three were intertwined.
  And as the athletes used, well oiled and nude,
    To feel their grip and, wary, watch their chance,
    Ere they to purpose strike and wrestle could;
  So each of them kept fixed on me his glance
    As he wheeled round, and in opposing ways
    His neck and feet seemed ever to advance.
  'Ah, if the misery of this sand-strewn place
    Bring us and our petitions in despite,'
    One then began, 'and flayed and grimy face;                     30
  Let at the least our fame goodwill incite
    To tell us who thou art, whose living feet
    Thus through Inferno wander without fright.
  For he whose footprints, as thou see'st, I beat,
    Though now he goes with body peeled and nude,
    More than thou thinkest, in the world was great.
  The grandson was he of Gualdrada good;
    He, Guidoguerra, with his armèd hand
    Did mighty things, and by his counsel shrewd.
  The other who behind me treads the sand                           40
    Is one whose name should on the earth be dear;
    For he is Tegghiaio Aldobrand.
  And I, who am tormented with them here,
    James Rusticucci was; my fierce and proud
    Wife of my ruin was chief minister.'
  If from the fire there had been any shroud
    I should have leaped down 'mong them, nor have earned
    Blame, for my Teacher sure had this allowed.
  But since I should have been all baked and burned,
    Terror prevailed the goodwill to restrain                       50
    With which to clasp them in my arms I yearned.
  Then I began: ''Twas not contempt but pain
    Which your condition in my breast awoke,
    Where deeply rooted it will long remain,
  When this my Master words unto me spoke,
    By which expectancy was in me stirred
    That ye who came were honourable folk.
  I of your city am, and with my word
    Your deeds and honoured names oft to recall
    Delighted, and with joy of them I heard.                        60
  To the sweet fruits I go, and leave the gall,
    As promised to me by my Escort true;
    But first I to the centre down must fall.'
  'So may thy soul thy members long endue
    With vital power,' the other made reply,
    'And after thee thy fame its light renew;
  As thou shalt tell if worth and courtesy
    Within our city as of yore remain,
    Or from it have been wholly forced to fly.
  For William Borsier, one of yonder train,                    70
    And but of late joined with us in this woe,
    Causeth us with his words exceeding pain.'
  'Upstarts, and fortunes suddenly that grow,
    Have bred in thee pride and extravagance,
    Whence tears, O Florence! thou art shedding now.'
  Thus cried I with uplifted countenance.
    The three, accepting it for a reply,
    Glanced each at each as hearing truth men glance.
  And all: 'If others thou shalt satisfy
    As well at other times at no more cost,                    80
    Happy thus at thine ease the truth to cry!
  Therefore if thou escap'st these regions lost,
    Returning to behold the starlight fair,
    Then when "There was I," thou shalt make thy boast,
  Something of us do thou 'mong men declare.'
    Then broken was the wheel, and as they fled
    Their nimble legs like pinions beat the air.
  So much as one _Amen!_ had scarce been said
    Quicker than what they vanished from our view.
    On this once more the way my Master led.                        90
  I followed, and ere long so near we drew
    To where the water fell, that for its roar
    Speech scarcely had been heard between us two.
  And as the stream which of all those which pour
    East (from Mount Viso counting) by its own
    Course falls the first from Apennine to shore--
  As Acquacheta in the uplands known
    By name, ere plunging to its bed profound;
    Name lost ere by Forlì its waters run--
  Above St. Benedict with one long bound,                          100
    Where for a thousand would be ample room,
    Falls from the mountain to the lower ground;
  Down the steep cliff that water dyed in gloom
    We found to fall echoing from side to side,
    Stunning the ear with its tremendous boom.
  There was a cord about my middle tied,
    With which I once had thought that I might hold
    Secure the leopard with the painted hide.
  When this from round me I had quite unrolled
    To him I handed it, all coiled and tight;                      110
    As by my Leader I had first been told.
  Himself then bending somewhat toward the right,
    He just beyond the edge of the abyss
    Threw down the cord, which disappeared from sight.
  'That some strange thing will follow upon this
    Unwonted signal which my Master's eye
    Thus follows,' so I thought, 'can hardly miss.'
  Ah, what great caution need we standing by
    Those who behold not only what is done,
    But who have wit our hidden thoughts to spy!                   120
  He said to me: 'There shall emerge, and soon,
    What I await; and quickly to thy view
    That which thou dream'st of shall be clearly known.'
  From utterance of truth which seems untrue
    A man, whene'er he can, should guard his tongue;
    Lest he win blame to no transgression due.
  Yet now I must speak out, and by the song
    Of this my Comedy, Reader, I swear--
    So in good liking may it last full long!--
  I saw a shape swim upward through that air.                      130
    All indistinct with gross obscurity,
    Enough to fill the stoutest heart with fear:
  Like one who rises having dived to free
    An anchor grappled on a jagged stone,
    Or something else deep hidden in the sea;
  With feet drawn in and arms all open thrown.



CANTO XVII.


  'Behold the monster with the pointed tail,
    Who passes mountains and can entrance make
    Through arms and walls! who makes the whole world ail,
  Corrupted by him!' Thus my Leader spake,
    And beckoned him that he should land hard by,
    Where short the pathways built of marble break.
  And that foul image of dishonesty
    Moving approached us with his head and chest,
    But to the bank drew not his tail on high.
  His face a human righteousness expressed,                         10
    'Twas so benignant to the outward view;
    A serpent was he as to all the rest.
  On both his arms hair to the arm-pits grew:
    On back and chest and either flank were knot
    And rounded shield portrayed in various hue;
  No Turk or Tartar weaver ever brought
    To ground or pattern a more varied dye;
    Nor by Arachne was such broidery wrought.
  As sometimes by the shore the barges lie
    Partly in water, partly on dry land;                            20
    And as afar in gluttonous Germany,
  Watching their prey, alert the beavers stand;
    So did this worst of brutes his foreparts fling
    Upon the stony rim which hems the sand.
  All of his tail in space was quivering,
    Its poisoned fork erecting in the air,
    Which scorpion-like was armèd with a sting.
  My Leader said: 'Now we aside must fare
    A little distance, so shall we attain
    Unto the beast malignant crouching there.'                      30
  So we stepped down upon the right, and then
    A half score steps to the outer edge did pace,
    Thus clearing well the sand and fiery rain.
  And when we were hard by him I could trace
    Upon the sand a little further on
    Some people sitting near to the abyss.
  'That what this belt containeth may be known
    Completely by thee,' then the Master said;
    'To see their case do thou advance alone.
  Let thy inquiries be succinctly made.                             40
    While thou art absent I will ask of him,
    With his strong shoulders to afford us aid.'
  Then, all alone, I on the outmost rim
    Of that Seventh Circle still advancing trod,
    Where sat a woful folk. Full to the brim
  Their eyes with anguish were, and overflowed;
    Their hands moved here and there to win some ease,
    Now from the flames, now from the soil which glowed.
  No otherwise in summer-time one sees,
    Working its muzzle and its paws, the hound                      50
    When bit by gnats or plagued with flies or fleas.
  And I, on scanning some who sat around
    Of those on whom the dolorous flames alight,
    Could recognise not one. I only found
  A purse hung from the throat of every wight,
    Each with its emblem and its special hue;
    And every eye seemed feasting on the sight.
  As I, beholding them, among them drew,
    I saw what seemed a lion's face and mien
    Upon a yellow purse designed in blue.                           60
  Still moving on mine eyes athwart the scene
    I saw another scrip, blood-red, display
    A goose more white than butter could have been.
  And one, on whose white wallet blazoned lay
    A pregnant sow in azure, to me said:
    'What dost thou in this pit? Do thou straightway
  Begone; and, seeing thou art not yet dead,
    Know that Vitalian, neighbour once of mine,
    Shall on my left flank one day find his bed.
  A Paduan I: all these are Florentine;                             70
    And oft they stun me, bellowing in my ear:
    "Come, Pink of Chivalry, for whom we pine,
  Whose is the purse on which three beaks appear:"'
    Then he from mouth awry his tongue thrust out
    Like ox that licks its nose; and I, in fear
  Lest more delay should stir in him some doubt
    Who gave command I should not linger long,
    Me from those wearied spirits turned about.
  I found my Guide, who had already sprung
    Upon the back of that fierce animal:                            80
    He said to me: 'Now be thou brave and strong.
  By stairs like this we henceforth down must fall.
    Mount thou in front, for I between would sit
    So thee the tail shall harm not nor appal.'
  Like one so close upon the shivering fit
    Of quartan ague that his nails grow blue,
    And seeing shade he trembles every whit,
  I at the hearing of that order grew;
    But his threats shamed me, as before the face
    Of a brave lord his man grows valorous too.                     90
  On the great shoulders then I took my place,
    And wished to say, but could not move my tongue
    As I expected: 'Do thou me embrace!'
  But he, who other times had helped me 'mong
    My other perils, when ascent I made
    Sustained me, and strong arms around me flung,
  And, 'Geryon, set thee now in motion!' said;
    'Wheel widely; let thy downward flight be slow;
    Think of the novel burden on thee laid.'
  As from the shore a boat begins to go                            100
    Backward at first, so now he backward pressed,
    And when he found that all was clear below,
  He turned his tail where earlier was his breast;
    And, stretching it, he moved it like an eel,
    While with his paws he drew air toward his chest.
  More terror Phaëthon could hardly feel
    What time he let the reins abandoned fall,
    Whence Heaven was fired, as still its tracts reveal;
  Nor wretched Icarus, on finding all
    His plumage moulting as the wax grew hot,                      110
    While, 'The wrong road!' his father loud did call;
  Than what I felt on finding I was brought
    Where nothing was but air and emptiness;
    For save the brute I could distinguish nought.
  He slowly, slowly swims; to the abyss
    Wheeling he makes descent, as I surmise
    From wind felt 'neath my feet and in my face.
  Already on the right I heard arise
    From out the caldron a terrific roar,
    Whereon I stretch my head with down-turned eyes.               120
  Terror of falling now oppressed me sore;
    Hearing laments, and seeing fires that burned,
    My thighs I tightened, trembling more and more.
  Earlier I had not by the eye discerned
    That we swept downward; scenes of torment now
    Seemed drawing nearer wheresoe'er we turned.
  And as a falcon (which long time doth go
    Upon the wing, not finding lure or prey),
    While 'Ha!' the falconer cries, 'descending so!'
  Comes wearied back whence swift it soared away;                  130
    Wheeling a hundred times upon the road,
    Then, from its master far, sulks angrily:
  So we, by Geryon in the deep bestowed,
    Were 'neath the sheer-hewn precipice set down:
    He, suddenly delivered from our load,
  Like arrow from the string was swiftly gone.



CANTO XVIII.


  Of iron colour, and composed of stone,
    A place called Malebolge is in Hell,
    Girt by a cliff of substance like its own.
  In that malignant region yawns a well
    Right in the centre, ample and profound;
    Of which I duly will the structure tell.
  The zone that lies between them, then, is round--
    Between the well and precipice hard and high;
    Into ten vales divided is the ground.
  As is the figure offered to the eye,                              10
    Where numerous moats a castle's towers enclose
    That they the walls may better fortify;
  A like appearance was made here by those.
    And as, again, from threshold of such place
    Many a drawbridge to the outworks goes;
  So ridges from the precipice's base
    Cutting athwart the moats and barriers run,
    Till at the well join the extremities.
  From Geryon's back when we were shaken down
    'Twas here we stood, until the Poet's feet                      20
    Moved to the left, and I, behind, came on.
  New torments on the right mine eyes did meet
    With new tormentors, novel woe on woe;
    With which the nearer Bolgia was replete.
  Sinners, all naked, in the gulf below,
    This side the middle met us; while they strode
    On that side with us, but more swift did go.
  Even so the Romans, that the mighty crowd
    Across the bridge, the year of Jubilee,
    Might pass with ease, ordained a rule of road--            30
  Facing the Castle, on that side should be
    The multitude which to St. Peter's hied;
    So to the Mount on this was passage free.
  On the grim rocky ground, on either side,
    I saw horned devils armed with heavy whip
    Which on the sinners from behind they plied.
  Ah, how they made the wretches nimbly skip
    At the first lashes; no one ever yet
    But sought from the second and the third to slip.
  And as I onward went, mine eyes were set                          40
    On one of them; whereon I called in haste:
    'This one already I have surely met!'
  Therefore to know him, fixedly I gazed;
    And my kind Leader willingly delayed,
    While for a little I my course retraced.
  On this the scourged one, thinking to evade
    My search, his visage bent without avail,
    For: 'Thou that gazest on the ground,' I said,
  'If these thy features tell trustworthy tale,
    Venedico Caccianimico thou!                                50
    But what has brought thee to such sharp regale?'
  And he, 'I tell it 'gainst my will, I trow,
    But thy clear accents to the old world bear
    My memory, and make me all avow.
  I was the man who Ghisola the fair
    To serve the Marquis' evil will led on,
    Whatever the uncomely tale declare.
  Of Bolognese here weeping not alone
    Am I; so full the place of them, to-day
    'Tween Reno and Savena are not known                       60
  So many tongues that _Sipa_ deftly say:
    And if of this thou'dst know the reason why,
    Think but how greedy were our hearts alway.'
  To him thus speaking did a demon cry:
    'Pander, begone!' and smote him with his thong;
    'Here are no women for thy coin to buy.'
  Then, with my Escort joined, I moved along.
    Few steps we made until we there had come,
    Where from the bank a rib of rock was flung.
  With ease enough up to its top we clomb,                          70
    And, turning on the ridge, bore to the right;
    And those eternal circles parted from.
  When we had reached where underneath the height
    A passage opes, yielding the scourged a way,
    My Guide bade: 'Tarry, so to hold in sight
  Those other spirits born in evil day,
    Whose faces until now from thee have been
    Concealed, because with ours their progress lay.'
  Then from the ancient bridge by us were seen
    The troop which toward us on that circuit sped,                 80
    Chased onward, likewise, by the scourges keen.
  And my good Master, ere I asked him, said:
    'That lordly one now coming hither, see,
    By whom, despite of pain, no tears are shed.
  What mien he still retains of majesty!
    'Tis Jason, who by courage and by guile
    The Colchians of the ram deprived. 'Twas he
  Who on his passage by the Lemnian isle,
    Where all of womankind with daring hand
    Upon their males had wrought a murder vile,                     90
  With loving pledges and with speeches bland
    The tender-yeared Hypsipyle betrayed,
    Who had herself a fraud on others planned.
  Forlorn he left her then, when pregnant made.
    That is the crime condemns him to this pain;
    And for Medea too is vengeance paid.
  Who in his manner cheat compose his train.
    Of the first moat sufficient now is known,
    And those who in its jaws engulfed remain.'
  Already had we by the strait path gone                           100
    To where 'tis with the second bank dovetailed--
    The buttress whence a second arch is thrown.
  Here heard we who in the next Bolgia wailed
    And puffed for breath; reverberations told
    They with their open palms themselves assailed.
  The sides were crusted over with a mould
    Plastered upon them by foul mists that rise,
    And both with eyes and nose a contest hold.
  The bottom is so deep, in vain our eyes
    Searched it till further up the bridge we went,                110
    To where the arch o'erhangs what under lies.
  Ascended there, our eyes we downward bent,
    And I saw people in such ordure drowned,
    A very cesspool 'twas of excrement.
  And while I from above am searching round,
    One with a head so filth-smeared I picked out,
    I knew not if 'twas lay, or tonsure-crowned.
  'Why then so eager,' asked he with a shout,
    'To stare at me of all the filthy crew?'
    And I to him: 'Because I scarce can doubt                      120
  That formerly thee dry of hair I knew,
    Alessio Interminei the Lucchese;
    And therefore thee I chiefly hold in view.'
  Smiting his head-piece, then, his words were these:
    ''Twas flattery steeped me here; for, using such,
    My tongue itself enough could never please.'
  'Now stretch thou somewhat forward, but not much,'
    Thereon my Leader bade me, 'and thine eyes
    Slowly advance till they her features touch
  And the dishevelled baggage recognise,                           130
    Clawing her yonder with her nails unclean,
    Now standing up, now squatting on her thighs.
  'Tis harlot Thais, who, when she had been
    Asked by her lover, "Am I generous
    And worthy thanks?" said, "Greatly so, I ween."
  Enough of this place has been seen by us.'



CANTO XIX.


  O Simon Magus! ye his wretched crew!
    The gifts of God, ordained to be the bride
    Of righteousness, ye prostitute that you
  With gold and silver may be satisfied;
    Therefore for you let now the trumpet blow,
    Seeing that ye in the Third Bolgia 'bide.
  Arrived at the next tomb, we to the brow
    Of rock ere this had finished our ascent,
    Which hangs true plumb above the pit below.
  What perfect art, O Thou Omniscient,                              10
    Is Thine in Heaven and earth and the bad world found!
    How justly does Thy power its dooms invent!
  The livid stone, on both banks and the ground,
    I saw was full of holes on every side,
    All of one size, and each of them was round.
  No larger seemed they to me nor less wide
    Than those within my beautiful St. John
    For the baptizers' standing-place supplied;
  And one of which, not many years agone,
    I broke to save one drowning; and I would                       20
    Have this for seal to undeceive men known.
  Out of the mouth of each were seen protrude
    A sinner's feet, and of the legs the small
    Far as the calves; the rest enveloped stood.
  And set on fire were both the soles of all,
    Which made their ankles wriggle with such throes
    As had made ropes and withes asunder fall.
  And as flame fed by unctuous matter goes
    Over the outer surface only spread;
    So from their heels it flickered to the toes.                   30
  'Master, who is he, tortured more,' I said,
    'Than are his neighbours, writhing in such woe;
    And licked by flames of deeper-hearted red?'
  And he: 'If thou desirest that below
    I bear thee by that bank which lowest lies,
    Thou from himself his sins and name shalt know.'
  And I: 'Thy wishes still for me suffice:
    Thou art my Lord, and knowest I obey
    Thy will; and dost my hidden thoughts surprise.'
  To the fourth barrier then we made our way,                       40
    And, to the left hand turning, downward went
    Into the narrow hole-pierced cavity;
  Nor the good Master caused me make descent
    From off his haunch till we his hole were nigh
    Who with his shanks was making such lament.
  'Whoe'er thou art, soul full of misery,
    Set like a stake with lower end upcast,'
    I said to him, 'Make, if thou canst, reply.'
  I like a friar stood who gives the last
    Shrift to a vile assassin, to his side                          50
    Called back to win delay for him fixed fast.
  'Art thou arrived already?' then he cried,
    'Art thou arrived already, Boniface?
    By several years the prophecy has lied.
  Art so soon wearied of the wealthy place,
    For which thou didst not fear to take with guile,
    Then ruin the fair Lady?' Now my case
  Was like to theirs who linger on, the while
    They cannot comprehend what they are told,
    And as befooled from further speech resile.                60
  But Virgil bade me: 'Speak out loud and bold,
    "I am not he thou thinkest, no, not he!"'
    And I made answer as by him controlled.
  The spirit's feet then twisted violently,
    And, sighing in a voice of deep distress,
    He asked: 'What then requirest thou of me?
  If me to know thou hast such eagerness,
    That thou the cliff hast therefore ventured down,
    Know, the Great Mantle sometime was my dress.
  I of the Bear, in sooth, was worthy son:                          70
    As once, the Cubs to help, my purse with gain
    I stuffed, myself I in this purse have stown.
  Stretched out at length beneath my head remain
    All the simoniacs that before me went,
    And flattened lie throughout the rocky vein.
  I in my turn shall also make descent,
    Soon as he comes who I believed thou wast,
    When I asked quickly what for him was meant.
  O'er me with blazing feet more time has past,
    While upside down I fill the topmost room,                      80
    Than he his crimsoned feet shall upward cast;
  For after him one viler still shall come,
    A Pastor from the West, lawless of deed:
    To cover both of us his worthy doom.
  A modern Jason he, of whom we read
    In Maccabees, whose King denied him nought:
    With the French King so shall this man succeed.'
  Perchance I ventured further than I ought,
    But I spake to him in this measure free:
    'Ah, tell me now what money was there sought                    90
  Of Peter by our Lord, when either key
    He gave him in his guardianship to hold?
    Sure He demanded nought save: "Follow me!"
  Nor Peter, nor the others, asked for gold
    Or silver when upon Matthias fell
    The lot instead of him, the traitor-souled.
  Keep then thy place, for thou art punished well,
    And clutch the pelf, dishonourably gained,
    Which against Charles made thee so proudly swell.
  And, were it not that I am still restrained                      100
    By reverence for those tremendous keys,
    Borne by thee while the glad world thee contained,
  I would use words even heavier than these;
    Seeing your avarice makes the world deplore,
    Crushing the good, filling the bad with ease.
  'Twas you, O Pastors, the Evangelist bore
    In mind what time he saw her on the flood
    Of waters set, who played with kings the whore;
  Who with seven heads was born; and as she would
    By the ten horns to her was service done,                      110
    Long as her spouse rejoiced in what was good.
  Now gold and silver are your god alone:
    What difference 'twixt the idolater and you,
    Save that ye pray a hundred for his one?
  Ah, Constantine, how many evils grew--
    Not from thy change of faith, but from the gift
    Wherewith thou didst the first rich Pope endue!'
  While I my voice continued to uplift
    To such a tune, by rage or conscience stirred
    Both of his soles he made to twist and shift.                  120
  My Guide, I well believe, with pleasure heard;
    Listening he stood with lips so well content
    To me propounding truthful word on word.
  Then round my body both his arms he bent,
    And, having raised me well upon his breast,
    Climbed up the path by which he made descent.
  Nor was he by his burden so oppressed
    But that he bore me to the bridge's crown,
    Which with the fourth joins the fifth rampart's crest.
  And lightly here he set his burden down,                         130
    Found light by him upon the precipice,
    Up which a goat uneasily had gone.
  And thence another valley met mine eyes.



CANTO XX.


  Now of new torment must my verses tell,
    And matter for the Twentieth Canto win
    Of Lay the First, which treats of souls in Hell.
  Already was I eager to begin
    To peer into the visible profound,
    Which tears of agony was bathèd in:
  And I saw people in the valley round;
    Like that of penitents on earth the pace
    At which they weeping came, nor uttering sound.
  When I beheld them with more downcast gaze,                  10
    That each was strangely screwed about I learned,
    Where chest is joined to chin. And thus the face
  Of every one round to his loins was turned;
    And stepping backward all were forced to go,
    For nought in front could be by them discerned.
  Smitten by palsy although one might show
    Perhaps a shape thus twisted all awry,
    I never saw, and am to think it slow.
  As, Reader, God may grant thou profit by
    Thy reading, for thyself consider well                          20
    If I could then preserve my visage dry
  When close at hand to me was visible
    Our human form so wrenched that tears, rained down
    Out of the eyes, between the buttocks fell.
  In very sooth I wept, leaning upon
    A boss of the hard cliff, till on this wise
    My Escort asked: 'Of the other fools art one?
  Here piety revives as pity dies;
    For who more irreligious is than he
    In whom God's judgments to regret give rise?                    30
  Lift up, lift up thy head, and thou shalt see
    Him for whom earth yawned as the Thebans saw,
    All shouting meanwhile: "Whither dost thou flee,
  Amphiaraüs? Wherefore thus withdraw
    From battle?" But he sinking found no rest
    Till Minos clutched him with all-grasping claw.
  Lo, how his shoulders serve him for a breast!
    Because he wished to see too far before
    Backward he looks, to backward course addressed.
  Behold Tiresias, who was changed all o'er,                   40
    Till for a man a woman met the sight,
    And not a limb its former semblance bore;
  And he behoved a second time to smite
    The same two twisted serpents with his wand,
    Ere he again in manly plumes was dight.
  With back to him, see Aruns next at hand,
    Who up among the hills of Luni, where
    Peasants of near Carrara till the land,
  Among the dazzling marbles held his lair
    Within a cavern, whence could be descried                       50
    The sea and stars of all obstruction bare.
  The other one, whose flowing tresses hide
    Her bosom, of the which thou seest nought,
    And all whose hair falls on the further side,
  Was Manto; who through many regions sought:
    Where I was born, at last her foot she stayed.
    It likes me well thou shouldst of this be taught.
  When from this life her father exit made,
    And Bacchus' city had become enthralled,
    She for long time through many countries strayed.               60
  'Neath mountains by which Germany is walled
    And bounded at Tirol, a lake there lies
    High in fair Italy, Benacus called.
  The waters of a thousand springs that rise
    'Twixt Val Camonica and Garda flow
    Down Pennine; and their flood this lake supplies.
  And from a spot midway, if they should go
    Thither, the Pastors of Verona, Trent,
    And Brescia might their blessings all bestow.
  Peschiera, with its strength for ornament,                   70
    Facing the Brescians and the Bergamese
    Lies where the bank to lower curve is bent.
  And there the waters, seeking more of ease,
    For in Benacus is not room for all,
    Forming a river, lapse by green degrees.
  The river, from its very source, men call
    No more Benacus--'tis as Mincio known,
    Which into Po does at Governo fall.
  A flat it reaches ere it far has run,
    Spreading o'er which it feeds a marshy fen,                     80
    Whence oft in summer pestilence has grown.
  Wayfaring here the cruel virgin, when
    She found land girdled by the marshy flood,
    Untilled and uninhabited of men,
  That she might 'scape all human neighbourhood
    Stayed on it with her slaves, her arts to ply;
    And there her empty body was bestowed.
  On this the people from the country nigh
    Into that place came crowding, for the spot,
    Girt by the swamp, could all attack defy,                       90
  And for the town built o'er her body sought
    A name from her who made it first her seat,
    Calling it Mantua, without casting lot.
  The dwellers in it were in number great,
    Till stupid Casalodi was befooled
    And victimised by Pinamonte's cheat.
  Hence, shouldst thou ever hear (now be thou schooled!)
    Another story to my town assigned,
    Let by no fraud the truth be overruled.'
  And I: 'Thy reasonings, Master, to my mind                       100
    So cogent are, and win my faith so well,
    What others say I shall black embers find.
  But of this people passing onward tell,
    If thou, of any, something canst declare,
    For all my thoughts on that intently dwell.'
  And then he said: 'The one whose bearded hair
    Falls from his cheeks upon his shoulders dun,
    Was, when the land of Greece of males so bare
  Was grown the very cradles scarce held one,
    An augur; he with Calchas gave the sign                   110
    In Aulis through the first rope knife to run.
  Eurypylus was he called, and in some line
    Of my high Tragedy is sung the same,
    As thou know'st well, who mad'st it wholly thine.
  That other, thin of flank, was known to fame
    As Michael Scott; and of a verity
    He knew right well the black art's inmost game.
  Guido Bonatti, and Asdente see
    Who mourns he ever should have parted from
    His thread and leather; but too late mourns he.                120
  Lo the unhappy women who left loom,
    Spindle, and needle that they might divine;
    With herb and image hastening men's doom.
  But come; for where the hemispheres confine
    Cain and the Thorns is falling, to alight
    Underneath Seville on the ocean line.
  The moon was full already yesternight;
    Which to recall thou shouldst be well content,
    For in the wood she somewhat helped thy plight.'
  Thus spake he to me while we forward went.                       130



CANTO XXI.


  Conversing still from bridge to bridge we went;
    But what our words I in my Comedy
    Care not to tell. The top of the ascent
  Holding, we halted the next pit to spy
    Of Malebolge, with plaints bootless all:
    There, darkness full of wonder met the eye.
  As the Venetians in their Arsenal
    Boil the tenacious pitch at winter-tide,
    To caulk the ships with for repairs that call;
  For then they cannot sail; and so, instead,                       10
    One builds his bark afresh, one stops with tow
    His vessel's ribs, by many a voyage tried;
  One hammers at the poop, one at the prow;
    Some fashion oars, and others cables twine,
    And others at the jib and main sails sew:
  So, not by fire, but by an art Divine,
    Pitch of thick substance boiled in that low Hell,
    And all the banks did as with plaster line.
  I saw it, but distinguished nothing well
    Except the bubbles by the boiling raised,                       20
    Now swelling up and ceasing now to swell.
  While down upon it fixedly I gazed,
    'Beware, beware!' my Leader to me said,
    And drew me thence close to him. I, amazed,
  Turned sharply round, like him who has delayed,
    Fain to behold the thing he ought to flee,
    Then, losing nerve, grows suddenly afraid,
  Nor lingers longer what there is to see;
    For a black devil I beheld advance
    Over the cliff behind us rapidly.                               30
  Ah me, how fierce was he of countenance!
    What bitterness he in his gesture put,
    As with spread wings he o'er the ground did dance!
  Upon his shoulders, prominent and acute,
    Was perched a sinner fast by either hip;
    And him he held by tendon of the foot.
  He from our bridge: 'Ho, Malebranche! Grip
    An Elder brought from Santa Zita's town:
    Stuff him below; myself once more I slip
  Back to the place where lack of such is none.                     40
    There, save Bonturo, barrates every man,
    And No grows Yes that money may be won.'
  He shot him down, and o'er the cliff began
    To run; nor unchained mastiff o'er the ground,
    Chasing a robber, swifter ever ran.
  The other sank, then rose with back bent round;
    But from beneath the bridge the devils cried:
    'Not here the Sacred Countenance is found,
  One swims not here as on the Serchio's tide;
    So if thou wouldst not with our grapplers deal                  50
    Do not on surface of the pitch abide.'
  Then he a hundred hooks was made to feel.
    'Best dance down there,' they said the while to him,
    'Where, if thou canst, thou on the sly mayst steal.'
  So scullions by the cooks are set to trim
    The caldrons and with forks the pieces steep
    Down in the water, that they may not swim.
  And the good Master said to me: 'Now creep
    Behind a rocky splinter for a screen;
    So from their knowledge thou thyself shalt keep.                60
  And fear not thou although with outrage keen
    I be opposed, for I am well prepared,
    And formerly have in like contest been.'
  Then passing from the bridge's crown he fared
    To the sixth bank, and when thereon he stood
    He needed courage doing what he dared.
  In the same furious and tempestuous mood
    In which the dogs upon the beggar leap,
    Who, halting suddenly, seeks alms or food,
  They issued forth from underneath the deep                        70
    Vault of the bridge, with grapplers 'gainst him stretched;
    But he exclaimed: 'Aloof, and harmless keep!
  Ere I by any of your hooks be touched,
    Come one of you and to my words give ear;
    And then advise you if I should be clutched.'
  All cried: 'Let Malacoda then go near;'
    On which one moved, the others standing still.
    He coming said: 'What will this help him here?'
  'O Malacoda, is it credible
    That I am come,' my Master then replied,                        80
    'Secure your opposition to repel,
  Without Heaven's will, and fate, upon my side?
    Let me advance, for 'tis by Heaven's behest
    That I on this rough road another guide.'
  Then was his haughty spirit so depressed,
    He let his hook drop sudden to his feet,
    And, 'Strike him not!' commanded all the rest
  My Leader charged me thus: 'Thou, from thy seat
    Where 'mid the bridge's ribs thou crouchest low,
    Rejoin me now in confidence complete.'                          90
  Whereon I to rejoin him was not slow;
    And then the devils, crowding, came so near,
    I feared they to their paction false might show.
  So at Caprona saw I footmen fear,
    Spite of their treaty, when a multitude
    Of foes received them, crowding front and rear.
  With all my body braced I closer stood
    To him, my Leader, and intently eyed
    The aspect of them, which was far from good.
  Lowering their grapplers, 'mong themselves they cried:
    'Shall I now tickle him upon the thigh?'                       101
    'Yea, see thou clip him deftly,' one replied.
  The demon who in parley had drawn nigh
    Unto my Leader, upon this turned round;
    'Scarmiglione, lay thy weapon by!'
  He said; and then to us: 'No way is found
    Further along this cliff, because, undone,
    All the sixth arch lies ruined on the ground.
  But if it please you further to pass on,
    Over this rocky ridge advancing climb                          110
    To the next rib, where passage may be won.
  Yestreen, but five hours later than this time,
    Twelve hundred sixty-six years reached an end,
    Since the way lost the wholeness of its prime.
  Thither I some of mine will straightway send
    To see that none peer forth to breathe the air:
    Go on with them; you they will not offend.
  You, Alichin and Calcabrin, prepare
    To move,' he bade; 'Cagnazzo, thou as well;
    Guiding the ten, thou, Barbariccia, fare.                      120
  With Draghignazzo, Libicocco fell,
    Fanged Ciriatto, Graffiacane too,
    Set on, mad Rubicant and Farfarel:
  Search on all quarters round the boiling glue.
    Let these go safe, till at the bridge they be,
    Which doth unbroken o'er the caverns go.'
  'Alas, my Master, what is this I see?'
    Said I, 'Unguided, let us forward set,
    If thou know'st how. I wish no company.
  If former caution thou dost not forget,                          130
    Dost thou not mark how each his teeth doth grind,
    The while toward us their brows are full of threat?'
  And he: 'I would not fear should fill thy mind;
   Let them grin all they will, and all they can;
    'Tis at the wretches in the pitch confined.'
  They wheeled and down the left hand bank began
    To march, but first each bit his tongue, and passed
    The signal on to him who led the van.
  He answered grossly as with trumpet blast.



CANTO XXII.


  Horsemen I've seen in march across the field,
    Hastening to charge, or, answering muster, stand,
    And sometimes too when forced their ground to yield;
  I have seen skirmishers upon your land,
    O Aretines! and those on foray sent;
    With trumpet and with bell to sound command
  Have seen jousts run and well-fought tournament,
    With drum, and signal from the castle shown,
    And foreign music with familiar blent;
  But ne'er by blast on such a trumpet blown                        10
    Beheld I horse or foot to motion brought,
    Nor ship by star or landmark guided on.
  With the ten demons moved we from the spot;
    Ah, cruel company! but 'with the good
    In church, and in the tavern with the sot.'
  Still to the pitch was my attention glued
    Fully to see what in the Bolgia lay,
    And who were in its burning mass imbrued.
  As when the dolphins vaulted backs display,
    Warning to mariners they should prepare                         20
    To trim their vessel ere the storm makes way;
  So, to assuage the pain he had to bear,
    Some wretch would show his back above the tide,
    Then swifter plunge than lightnings cleave the air.
  And as the frogs close to the marsh's side
    With muzzles thrust out of the water stand,
    While feet and bodies carefully they hide;
  So stood the sinners upon every hand.
    But on beholding Barbariccia nigh
    Beneath the bubbles disappeared the band.                  30
  I saw what still my heart is shaken by:
    One waiting, as it sometimes comes to pass
    That one frog plunges, one at rest doth lie;
  And Graffiacan, who nearest to him was,
    Him upward drew, clutching his pitchy hair:
    To me he bore the look an otter has.
  I of their names ere this was well aware,
    For I gave heed unto the names of all
    When they at first were chosen. 'Now prepare,
  And, Rubicante, with thy talons fall                              40
    Upon him and flay well,' with many cries
    And one consent the accursed ones did call.
  I said: 'O Master, if in any wise
    Thou canst, find out who is the wretched wight
    Thus at the mercy of his enemies.'
  Whereon my Guide drew full within his sight,
    Asking him whence he came, and he replied:
    'In kingdom of Navarre I first saw light.
  Me servant to a lord my mother tied;
    Through her I from a scoundrel sire did spring,                 50
    Waster of goods and of himself beside.
  As servant next to Thiebault, righteous king,
    I set myself to ply barratorship;
    And in this heat discharge my reckoning.'
  And Ciriatto, close upon whose lip
    On either side a boar-like tusk did stand,
    Made him to feel how one of them could rip.
  The mouse had stumbled on the wild cat band;
    But Barbariccia locked him in embrace,
    And, 'Off while I shall hug him!' gave command.                 60
  Round to my Master then he turned his face:
    'Ask more of him if more thou wouldest know,
    While he against their fury yet finds grace.'
  My Leader asked: 'Declare now if below
    The pitch 'mong all the guilty there lies here
    A Latian?' He replied: 'Short while ago
  From one I parted who to them lived near;
    And would that I might use him still for shield,
    Then hook or claw I should no longer fear,'
  Said Libicocco: 'Too much grace we yield.'                        70
    And in the sinner's arm he fixed his hook,
    And from it clean a fleshy fragment peeled.
  But seeing Draghignazzo also took
    Aim at his legs, the leader of the Ten
    Turned swiftly round on them with angry look.
  On this they were a little quieted; then
    Of him who still gazed on his wound my Guide
    Without delay demanded thus again:
  'Who was it whom, in coming to the side,
    Thou say'st thou didst do ill to leave behind?'                 80
    'Gomita of Gallura,' he replied,
  'A vessel full of fraud of every kind,
    Who, holding in his power his master's foes,
    So used them him they bear in thankful mind;
  For, taking bribes, he let slip all of those,
    He says; and he in other posts did worse,
    And as a chieftain 'mong barrators rose.
  Don Michael Zanche doth with him converse,
   From Logodoro, and with endless din
    They gossip of Sardinian characters.                       90
  But look, ah me! how yonder one doth grin.
    More would I say, but that I am afraid
    He is about to claw me on the skin.'
  To Farfarel the captain turned his head,
    For, as about to swoop, he rolled his eye,
    And, 'Cursed hawk, preserve thy distance!' said.
  'If ye would talk with, or would closer spy,'
    The frighted wretch began once more to say,
    'Tuscans or Lombards, I will bring them nigh.
  But let the Malebranche first give way,                          100
    That of their vengeance they may not have fear,
    And I to this same place where now I stay
  For me, who am but one, will bring seven near
    When I shall whistle as we use to do
    Whenever on the surface we appear.'
  On this Cagnazzo up his muzzle threw,
    Shaking his head and saying: 'Hear the cheat
    He has contrived, to throw himself below.'
  Then he who in devices was complete:
    'Far too malicious, in good sooth,' replied,                   110
    'When for my friends I plan a sorer fate.'
  This, Alichin withstood not but denied
    The others' counsel, saying: 'If thou fling
    Thyself hence, thee I strive not to outstride.
  But o'er the pitch I'll dart upon the wing.
    Leave we the ridge, and be the bank a shield;
    And see if thou canst all of us outspring.'
  O Reader, hear a novel trick revealed.
    All to the other side turned round their eyes,
    He first who slowest was the boon to yield.               120
  In choice of time the Navarrese was wise;
    Taking firm stand, himself he forward flung,
    Eluding thus their hostile purposes.
  Then with compunction each of them was stung,
    But he the most whose slackness made them fail;
    Therefore he started, 'Caught!' upon his tongue.
  But little it bested, nor could prevail
    His wings 'gainst fear. Below the other went,
    While he with upturned breast aloft did sail.
  And as the falcon, when, on its descent,                         130
    The wild duck suddenly dives out of sight,
    Returns outwitted back, and malcontent;
  To be befooled filled Calcabrin with spite.
    Hovering he followed, wishing in his mind
    The wretch escaping should leave cause for fight.
  When the barrator vanished, from behind
    He on his comrade with his talons fell
    And clawed him, 'bove the moat with him entwined.
  The other was a spar-hawk terrible
    To claw in turn; together then the two                         140
    Plunged in the boiling pool. The heat full well
  How to unlock their fierce embraces knew;
    But yet they had no power to rise again,
    So were their wings all plastered o'er with glue.
  Then Barbariccia, mourning with his train,
    Caused four to fly forth to the other side
    With all their grapplers. Swift their flight was ta'en.
  Down to the place from either hand they glide,
    Reaching their hooks to those who were limed fast,
    And now beneath the scum were being fried.                     150
  And from them thus engaged we onward passed.



CANTO XXIII.


  Silent, alone, not now with company
    We onward went, one first and one behind,
    As Minor Friars use to make their way.
  On Æsop's fable wholly was my mind
    Intent, by reason of that contest new--
    The fable where the frog and mouse we find;
  For _Mo_ and _Issa_ are not more of hue
    Than like the fable shall the fact appear,
    If but considered with attention due.
  And as from one thought springs the next, so here                 10
    Out of my first arose another thought,
    Until within me doubled was my fear.
  For thus I judged: Seeing through us were brought
    Contempt upon them, hurt, and sore despite,
    They needs must be to deep vexation wrought.
  If anger to malevolence unite,
    Then will they us more cruelly pursue
    Than dog the hare which almost feels its bite.
  All my hair bristled, I already knew,
    With terror when I spake: 'O Master, try                        20
    To hide us quick' (and back I turned to view
  What lay behind), 'for me they terrify,
    These Malebranche following us; from dread
    I almost fancy I can feel them nigh.'
  And he: 'Were I a mirror backed with lead
    I should no truer glass that form of thine,
    Than all thy thought by mine is answered.
  For even now thy thoughts accord with mine,
    Alike in drift and featured with one face;
    And to suggest one counsel they combine.                        30
  If the right bank slope downward at this place,
    To the next Bolgia offering us a way,
    Swiftly shall we evade the imagined chase.'
  Ere he completely could his purpose say,
    I saw them with their wings extended wide,
    Close on us; as of us to make their prey.
  Then quickly was I snatched up by my Guide:
    Even as a mother when, awaked by cries,
    She sees the flames are kindling at her side,
  Delaying not, seizes her child and flies;                         40
    Careful for him her proper danger mocks,
    Nor even with one poor shift herself supplies.
  And he, stretched out upon the flinty rocks,
    Himself unto the precipice resigned
    Which one side of the other Bolgia blocks.
  A swifter course ne'er held a stream confined,
    That it may turn a mill, within its race,
    Where near the buckets 'tis the most declined
  Than was my Master's down that rock's sheer face;
    Nor seemed I then his comrade, as we sped,                      50
    But like a son locked in a sire's embrace.
  And barely had his feet struck on the bed
    Of the low ground, when they were seen to stand
    Upon the crest, no more a cause of dread.
  For Providence supreme, who so had planned
    In the Fifth Bolgia they should minister,
    Them wholly from departure thence had banned.
  'Neath us we saw a painted people fare,
    Weeping as on their way they circled slow,
    Crushed by fatigue to look at, and despair.                     60
  Cloaks had they on with hoods pulled down full low
    Upon their eyes, and fashioned, as it seemed,
    Like those which at Cologne for monks they sew.
  The outer face was gilt so that it gleamed;
    Inside was all of lead, of such a weight
    Frederick's to these had been but straw esteemed.
  O weary robes for an eternal state!
    With them we turned to the left hand once more,
    Intent upon their tears disconsolate.
  But those folk, wearied with the loads they bore,                 70
    So slowly crept that still new company
    Was ours at every footfall on the floor.
  Whence to my Guide I said: 'Do thou now try
    To find some one by name or action known,
    And as we go on all sides turn thine eye.'
  And one, who recognised the Tuscan tone,
    Called from behind us: 'Halt, I you entreat
    Who through the air obscure are hastening on;
  Haply in me thou what thou seek'st shalt meet.'
    Whereon my Guide turned round and said: 'Await,
    And keep thou time with pacing of his feet.'                    81
  I stood, and saw two manifesting great
    Desire to join me, by their countenance;
    But their loads hampered them and passage strait.
  And, when arrived, me with an eye askance
    They gazed on long time, but no word they spoke;
    Then, to each other turned, held thus parlance:
  'His heaving throat proves him of living folk.
    If they are of the dead, how could they gain
    To walk uncovered by the heavy cloak?'                          90
  Then to me: 'Tuscan, who dost now attain
    To the college of the hypocrites forlorn,
    To tell us who thou art show no disdain.'
  And I to them: 'I was both bred and born
    In the great city by fair Arno's stream,
    And wear the body I have always worn.
  But who are ye, whose suffering supreme
    Makes tears, as I behold, to flood the cheek;
    And what your mode of pain that thus doth gleam?'
  'Ah me, the yellow mantles,' one to speak                        100
    Began, 'are all of lead so thick, its weight
    Maketh the scales after this manner creak.
  We, Merry Friars of Bologna's state,
    I Catalano, Loderingo he,
    Were by thy town together designate,
  As for the most part one is used to be,
    To keep the peace within it; and around
    Gardingo, what we were men still may see.'
  I made beginning: 'Friars, your profound--'
    But said no more, on suddenly seeing there                     110
    One crucified by three stakes to the ground,
  Who, when he saw me, writhed as in despair,
    Breathing into his beard with heavy sigh.
    And Friar Catalan, of this aware,
  Said: 'He thus fixed, on whom thou turn'st thine eye,
    Counselled the Pharisees that it behoved
    One man as victim for the folk should die.
  Naked, thou seest, he lies, and ne'er removed
    From where, set 'cross the path, by him the weight
    Of every one that passes by is proved.                         120
  And his wife's father shares an equal fate,
    With others of the Council, in this fosse;
    For to the Jews they proved seed reprobate.'
  Meanwhile at him thus stretched upon the cross
    Virgil, I saw, displayed astonishment--
    At his mean exile and eternal loss.
  And then this question to the Friars he sent:
    'Be not displeased, but, if ye may, avow
    If on the right hand there lies any vent
  By which we, both of us, from hence may go,                 130
    Nor need the black angelic company
    To come to help us from this valley low.'
  'Nearer than what thou think'st,' he made reply,
    'A rib there runs from the encircling wall,
    The cruel vales in turn o'erarching high;
  Save that at this 'tis rent and ruined all.
    Ye can climb upward o'er the shattered heap
    Where down the side the piled-up fragments fall.'
  His head bent down a while my Guide did keep,
    Then said: 'He warned us in imperfect wise,               140
    Who sinners with his hook doth clutch and steep.'
  The Friar: 'At Bologna many a vice
    I heard the Devil charged with, and among
    The rest that, false, he father is of lies.'
  Then onward moved my Guide with paces long,
    And some slight shade of anger on his face.
    I with him parted from the burdened throng,
  Stepping where those dear feet had left their trace.



CANTO XXIV.


  In season of the new year, when the sun
    Beneath Aquarius warms again his hair,
    And somewhat on the nights the days have won;
  When on the ground the hoar-frost painteth fair
    A mimic image of her sister white--
    But soon her brush of colour is all bare--
  The clown, whose fodder is consumed outright,
    Rises and looks abroad, and, all the plain
    Beholding glisten, on his thigh doth smite.
  Returned indoors, like wretch that seeks in vain                  10
    What he should do, restless he mourns his case;
    But hope revives when, looking forth again,
  He sees the earth anew has changed its face.
    Then with his crook he doth himself provide,
    And straightway doth his sheep to pasture chase:
  So at my Master was I terrified,
    His brows beholding troubled; nor more slow
    To where I ailed the plaster was applied.
  For when the broken bridge we stood below
    My Guide turned to me with the expression sweet                 20
    Which I beneath the mountain learned to know.
  His arms he opened, after counsel meet
    Held with himself, and, scanning closely o'er
    The fragments first, he raised me from my feet;
  And like a man who, working, looks before,
    With foresight still on that in front bestowed,
    Me to the summit of a block he bore
  And then to me another fragment showed,
    Saying: 'By this thou now must clamber on;
    But try it first if it will bear thy load.'                     30
  The heavy cowled this way could ne'er have gone,
    For hardly we, I holpen, he so light,
    Could clamber up from shattered stone to stone.
  And but that on the inner bank the height
    Of wall is not so great, I say not he,
    But for myself I had been vanquished quite.
  But Malebolge to the cavity
    Of the deep central pit is planned to fall;
    Hence every Bolgia in its turn must be
  High on the out, low on the inner wall;                           40
    So to the summit we attained at last,
    Whence breaks away the topmost stone of all.
  My lungs were so with breathlessness harassed,
    The summit won, I could no further go;
    And, hardly there, me on the ground I cast
  'Well it befits that thou shouldst from thee throw
    All sloth,' the Master said; 'for stretched in down
    Or under awnings none can glory know.
  And he who spends his life nor wins renown
    Leaves in the world no more enduring trace                      50
    Than smoke in air, or foam on water blown.
  Therefore arise; o'ercome thy breathlessness
    By force of will, victor in every fight
    When not subservient to the body base.
  Of stairs thou yet must climb a loftier flight:
    'Tis not enough to have ascended these.
    Up then and profit if thou hear'st aright.'
  Rising I feigned to breathe with greater ease
    Than what I felt, and spake: 'Now forward plod,
    For with my courage now my strength agrees.'                    60
  Up o'er the rocky rib we held our road;
    And rough it was and difficult and strait,
    And steeper far than that we earlier trod.
  Speaking I went, to hide my wearied state,
    When from the neighbouring moat a voice we heard
    Which seemed ill fitted to articulate.
  Of what it said I knew not any word,
    Though on the arch that vaults the moat set high;
    But he who spake appeared by anger stirred.
  Though I bent downward yet my eager eye,                          70
    So dim the depth, explored it all in vain;
    I then: 'O Master, to that bank draw nigh,
  And let us by the wall descent obtain,
    Because I hear and do not understand,
    And looking down distinguish nothing plain.'
  'My sole reply to thee,' he answered bland,
    'Is to perform; for it behoves,' he said,
    'With silent act to answer just demand.'
  Then we descended from the bridge's head,
    Where with the eighth bank is its junction wrought;             80
    And full beneath me was the Bolgia spread.
  And I perceived that hideously 'twas fraught
    With serpents; and such monstrous forms they bore,
    Even now my blood is curdled at the thought.
  Henceforth let sandy Libya boast no more!
    Though she breed hydra, snake that crawls or flies,
    Twy-headed, or fine-speckled, no such store
  Of plagues, nor near so cruel, she supplies,
    Though joined to all the land of Ethiop,
    And that which by the Red Sea waters lies.                      90
  'Midst this fell throng and dismal, without hope
    A naked people ran, aghast with fear--
    No covert for them and no heliotrope.
  Their hands were bound by serpents at their rear,
    Which in their reins for head and tail did get
    A holding-place: in front they knotted were.
  And lo! to one who on our side was set
    A serpent darted forward, him to bite
    At where the neck is by the shoulders met.
  Nor _O_ nor _I_ did any ever write                               100
    More quickly than he kindled, burst in flame,
    And crumbled all to ashes. And when quite
  He on the earth a wasted heap became,
    The ashes of themselves together rolled,
    Resuming suddenly their former frame.
  Thus, as by mighty sages we are told,
    The Phoenix dies, and then is born again,
    When it is close upon five centuries old.
  In all its life it eats not herb nor grain,
    But only tears that from frankincense flow;                    110
    It, for a shroud, sweet nard and myrrh contain.
  And as the man who falls and knows not how,
    By force of demons stretched upon the ground,
    Or by obstruction that makes life run low,
  When risen up straight gazes all around
    In deep confusion through the anguish keen
    He suffered from, and stares with sighs profound:
  So was the sinner, when arisen, seen.
    Justice of God, how are thy terrors piled,
    Showering in vengeance blows thus big with teen!               120
  My Guide then asked of him how he was styled.
    Whereon he said: 'From Tuscany I rained,
    Not long ago, into this gullet wild.
  From bestial life, not human, joy I gained,
    Mule that I was; me, Vanni Fucci, brute,
    Pistoia, fitting den, in life contained.'
  I to my Guide: 'Bid him not budge a foot,
    And ask what crime has plunged him here below.
    In rage and blood I knew him dissolute.'
  The sinner heard, nor insincere did show,                        130
    But towards me turned his face and eke his mind,
    With spiteful shame his features all aglow;
  Then said: 'It pains me more thou shouldst me find
    And catch me steeped in all this misery,
    Than when the other life I left behind.
  What thou demandest I can not deny:
    I'm plunged thus low because the thief I played
    Within the fairly furnished sacristy;
  And falsely to another's charge 'twas laid.
    Lest thou shouldst joy such sight has met thy view
    If e'er these dreary regions thou evade,                       141
  Give ear and hearken to my utterance true:
    The Neri first out of Pistoia fail,
    Her laws and parties Florence shapes anew;
  Mars draws a vapour out of Magra's vale,
    Which black and threatening clouds accompany:
    Then bursting in a tempest terrible
  Upon Piceno shall the war run high;
    The mist by it shall suddenly be rent,
    And every Bianco smitten be thereby:                      150
  And I have told thee that thou mayst lament.'



CANTO XXV.


  The robber, when his words were ended so,
    Made both the figs and lifted either fist,
    Shouting: 'There, God! for them at thee I throw.'
  Then were the snakes my friends; for one 'gan twist
    And coiled itself around the sinner's throat,
    As if to say: 'Now would I have thee whist.'
  Another seized his arms and made a knot,
    Clinching itself upon them in such wise
    He had no power to move them by a jot.
  Pistoia! thou, Pistoia, shouldst devise                      10
    To burn thyself to ashes, since thou hast
    Outrun thy founders in iniquities.
  The blackest depths of Hell through which I passed
    Showed me no soul 'gainst God so filled with spite,
    No, not even he who down Thebes' wall was cast.
  He spake no further word, but turned to flight;
    And I beheld a Centaur raging sore
    Come shouting: 'Of the ribald give me sight!'
  I scarce believe Maremma yieldeth more
    Snakes of all kinds than what composed the load                 20
    Which on his back, far as our form, he bore.
  Behind his nape, with pinions spread abroad,
    A dragon couchant on his shoulders lay
    To set on fire whoever bars his road.
  'This one is Cacus,' did my Master say,
    'Who underneath the rock of Aventine
    Watered a pool with blood day after day.
  Not with his brethren runs he in the line,
    Because of yore the treacherous theft he wrought
    Upon the neighbouring wealthy herd of kine:                     30
  Whence to his crooked course an end was brought
    'Neath Hercules' club, which on him might shower down
    A hundred blows; ere ten he suffered nought.'
  While this he said, the other had passed on;
    And under us three spirits forward pressed
    Of whom my Guide and I had nothing known
  But that: 'Who are ye?' they made loud request.
    Whereon our tale no further could proceed;
    And toward them wholly we our wits addressed.
  I recognised them not, but gave good heed;                        40
    Till, as it often haps in such a case,
    To name another, one discovered need,
  Saying: 'Now where stopped Cianfa in the race?'
    Then, that my Guide might halt and hearken well,
    On chin and nose I did my finger place.
  If, Reader, to believe what now I tell
    Thou shouldst be slow, I wonder not, for I
    Who saw it all scarce find it credible.
  While I on them my brows kept lifted high
    A serpent, which had six feet, suddenly flew                    50
    At one of them and held him bodily.
  Its middle feet about his paunch it drew,
    And with the two in front his arms clutched fast,
    And bit one cheek and the other through and through.
  Its hinder feet upon his thighs it cast,
    Thrusting its tail between them till behind,
    Distended o'er his reins, it upward passed.
  The ivy to a tree could never bind
    Itself so firmly as this dreadful beast
    Its members with the other's intertwined.                       60
  Each lost the colour that it once possessed,
    And closely they, like heated wax, unite,
    The former hue of neither manifest:
  Even so up o'er papyrus, when alight,
    Before the flame there spreads a colour dun,
    Not black as yet, though from it dies the white.
  The other two meanwhile were looking on,
    Crying: 'Agnello, how art thou made new!
    Thou art not twain, and yet no longer one.'
  A single head was moulded out of two;                             70
    And on our sight a single face arose,
    Which out of both lost countenances grew.
  Four separate limbs did but two arms compose;
    Belly with chest, and legs with thighs did grow
    To members such as nought created shows.
  Their former fashion was all perished now:
    The perverse shape did both, yet neither seem;
    And, thus transformed, departed moving slow.
  And as the lizard, which at fierce extreme
    Of dog-day heat another hedge would gain,                       80
    Flits 'cross the path swift as the lightning's gleam;
  Right for the bellies of the other twain
    A little snake quivering with anger sped,
    Livid and black as is a pepper grain,
  And on the part by which we first are fed
    Pierced one of them; and then upon the ground
    It fell before him, and remained outspread.
  The wounded gazed on it, but made no sound.
    Rooted he stood and yawning, scarce awake,
    As seized by fever or by sleep profound.                        90
  It closely watched him and he watched the snake,
    While from its mouth and from his wound 'gan swell
    Volumes of smoke which joined one cloud to make.
  Be Lucan henceforth dumb, nor longer tell
    Of plagued Sabellus and Nassidius,
    But, hearkening to what follows, mark it well.
  Silent be Ovid: of him telling us
    How Cadmus to a snake, and to a fount
    Changed Arethuse, I am not envious;
  For never of two natures front to front                          100
    In metamorphosis, while mutually
    The forms their matter changed, he gives account.
  'Twas thus that each to the other made reply:
    Its tail into a fork the serpent split;
    Bracing his feet the other pulled them nigh:
  And then in one so thoroughly were knit
    His legs and thighs, no searching could divine
    At where the junction had been wrought in it.
  The shape, of which the one lost every sign,
    The cloven tail was taking; then the skin                      110
    Of one grew rough, the other's soft and fine.
  I by the armpits saw the arms drawn in;
    And now the monster's feet, which had been small,
    What the other's lost in length appeared to win.
  Together twisted, its hind feet did fall
    And grew the member men are used to hide:
    For his the wretch gained feet with which to crawl.
  Dyed in the smoke they took on either side
    A novel colour: hair unwonted grew
    On one; the hair upon the other died.                          120
  The one fell prone, erect the other drew,
    With cruel eyes continuing to glare,
    'Neath which their muzzles metamorphose knew.
  The erect to his brows drew his. Of stuff to spare
    Of what he upward pulled, there was no lack;
    So ears were formed on cheeks that erst were bare.
  Of that which clung in front nor was drawn back,
    Superfluous, on the face was formed a nose,
    And lips absorbed the skin that still was slack.
  His muzzle who lay prone now forward goes;                       130
    Backward into his head his ears he draws
    Even as a snail appears its horns to lose.
  The tongue, which had been whole and ready was
    For speech, cleaves now; the forked tongue of the snake
    Joins in the other: and the smoke has pause.
  The soul which thus a brutish form did take,
    Along the valley, hissing, swiftly fled;
    The other close behind it spluttering spake,
  Then, toward it turning his new shoulders, said
    Unto the third: 'Now Buoso down the way                        140
    May hasten crawling, as I earlier sped.'
  Ballast which in the Seventh Bolgia lay
    Thus saw I shift and change. Be my excuse
    The novel theme, if swerves my pen astray.
  And though these things mine eyesight might confuse
    A little, and my mind with fear divide,
    Such secrecy they fleeing could not use
  But that Puccio Sciancatto plain I spied;
    And he alone of the companions three
    Who came at first, was left unmodified.                        150
  For the other, tears, Gaville, are shed by thee.
