II--IN THE CONQUERED CITY OF LVOV

We draw up in the great station at Lvov. To the right of us stretch
endless lines crowded with wagons, especially with sanitary trains. In
the lofty passages and waiting-rooms are sleeping troops with piled
muskets, some wounded on stretchers tended by the sisters of mercy who
are constantly on duty here, and a crowd of men, all soldiers, coming
and going. One passed many Austrian prisoners, of whom another enormous
batch was just announced to arrive; and elsewhere a Russian private
explained to me the excellent quality of the Hungarian knapsack, which
he and his comrades had turned into busbies. One man was asleep inside
the rail opposite the ticket office. He did not seem to mind how often
he was awakened.

In the town everything is quiet, and life goes so naturally that no
one could take it for a conquered city. In the country this might have
been expected because far the greater part of the population is Little
Russian; but in Lvov the Russians are only about 17 per cent. and the
predominant element is the Polish (60 per cent.), the rest being Jews
(20 per cent.) or Germans (3 per cent.).

Lvov is taking on more of the character of a Russian town. Many of the
Jews have left. The Russian signs over new restaurants, stores, etc.,
meet the eye everywhere. Of the Little Russian party which supported
the Austrians, many have now returned and are making their peace with
the new authorities. The Russian soldier is quite at home in Lvov, as
one sees when the singing "drafts" swing past the Governor-General's
palace; the Austrian prisoners in uniform, who are allowed liberty on
parole, seem equally at their ease. Numbers of Russian priests are
pouring into Galicia, but not fast enough for the Uniat villages which
have embraced Orthodoxy; as soon as they arrive, peasants come with
their carts and take them off to their parishes, without waiting for
any formal distribution. The Uniat creed and ritual are practically
identical with the Orthodox, so that the difference between the two
was purely political. At the new People's Palace of Nicholas II, I
saw a number of children, principally from families that had suffered
severely at the hands of Austrian troops, receive Christmas presents
on the day of St. Nicholas, who is the Russian Santa Claus. Archbishop
Eulogius, in a very effective little address, told them that the
biggest Christmas present which they were receiving was the liberty to
speak their own language and worship in their own way in union with
their Russian brothers.

Starting for the army, I spent a night of strange happening in the
great railway station, as our train was delayed till the morning. At
one time I went, in the frosty night, to look for it at the goods
station, where there were endless rails and wagons, and found it
after a long search. In the big restaurant four little boys made
great friends with me, one of fourteen in uniform and spurs who had
been serving as mounted scout with a regiment at the front, and
one of thirteen who had attached himself in the same capacity to a
battery. Both were small creatures, and the first was a remarkable
little person, with all the smartness and determination of a soldier,
relieved by an amusing childlike grace and courtesy. He said to me in a
confidential voice, "I see you are very fond of little children," and
he ordered with pride lemonade and chocolates for us both. He said the
men at the front could last a week to ten days, if necessary, without
any food but _sukhari_ (army biscuit), so long as they had cigarettes.
His imagination had been caught by the aeroplanes over Peremyshl,
and also by the Carpathians, which he described with an up and down
movement of the hand. He had a great disgust for anything mean and a
warlike pride in the exploits of the soldiers of his regiment. His
model was a boy, now a young man, who had been through the Japanese
War. "If a general comes past," and he made a salute to show the
extreme respect felt for his hero. Many a time in that long night,
while the weary heads of doctors and sisters of mercy were bent in
sheer tiredness against the tables, he would come and sit by me and
ask me to read the war news to him, or to tell him about the English
submarines. He left me with the smartest of salutes in the early hours
of the morning.


III--TALES TOLD ON AN ARMY TRAIN

Our train is an enormous one with endless warm carriages (_teplushki_)
for the wounded. The staff of sanitars and sisters, working for the
Zemstvo Red Cross, live in a spotlessly clean carriage, and there are
special carriages for drugs, stores, kitchen, etc. They are simple and
interesting people, and, as I am now in the Red Cross and have many
interests in common with them, they kindly made me up a bed in their
carriage, where we discussed Russia in all its bearings.

We carry a group of passengers who have all made friends after the
Russian way. A colonel and his wife are going to fetch the body of
a fallen comrade. Another colonel, a delightfully simple man with
close-cropped hair, thin brown face and bright, clever eyes seems to
know all the Slavonic languages and has much to say of the Austrians.
He has seen twenty of them surrender to a priest and his clerk who
came on them in a wood, made the sign of the cross and told them to
come with them. In another place twenty-two Austrians were captured by
two Russians. The Austrian officers put quick-firing guns behind their
own rifle pits for the "encouragement" of their men, on whom he has
seen them fire. They make their gunners fire every two hours in the
night as a kind of exercise. He has seen them form their men in close
column under fire and march them about up and down along the line of
the Russian trenches. The Austrian artillery seldom takes cover; the
Russian directs its fire on the enemy rather than on his batteries. In
one place, heavy Russian artillery at a range of seven miles demolished
an Austrian field train and two battalions who were lunching in the
square of a small town. He is full of life and confidence, and all that
he says breathes of fresh air and of work.

Our train made its way through to the furthest point up. We had to stop
several times to let through the ambulance trains already charged with
wounded, which take precedence. We had to go very slowly over several
repaired bridges; and this was no simple matter, as we had twenty-seven
long and heavy coaches. Some of these repairs were complicated pieces
of work, as the bridges were high above the level of the rivers. At
point after point, and especially on the Austrian sides of the rivers,
we passed lines of carefully prepared trenches, and in one place there
was a masterpiece of artillery cover, with every arrangement for a long
stay.

The damage done by the artillery fire was sporadic--here a smashed
station building, there a town where several houses had suffered. But
there was nothing indiscriminate; and the Polish population, which
showed no sign of any hostility to the Russians, seemed to find the war
conditions livable.

As in other parts, I was specially struck by the easy relations
existing between the inhabitants, the Austrian soldiers and their
Russian captors. There were exceptions. I had some talk with a few
Austrian Germans from Vienna. They were simple folk and seemed to
have no grudge against the Russians; and the circumstance in their
position which they felt most--they were only taken the day before
yesterday--was that this was Christmas Eve, the "_stille Nacht, heilige
Nacht_" of the beautiful German hymn, and that they were far from home
among strange people. They kept apart as far as possible not only from
their captors but from their fellow prisoners from Bohemia and Moravia.
These last seemed at least quite comfortable, smoking their long pipes
and leisurely sweeping the platforms. They were quite a large company.
They understood my Russian better than my German. When I asked them
how they stood with the German troops, instead of the sturdy "Gut" of
their Viennese fellows, they answered with a slang word and a gesture.
When asked about the Russians, they replied in a quite matter-of-course
way: "We are brothers and speak the same tongue; we are one people."
For any difficulties, the Poles often prove good interpreters. It is
very different for the Austrian captive officers, who often cannot
understand their own men.

These Czechs confidently assured me that any Russian troops that
entered Bohemia would be welcomed as friends; and they claimed that
not only the neighboring Moravians and Slovaks but also the Croats
further south were to be taken as feeling as they did. The Bohemians
and Moravians seem to be surrendering in the largest numbers of all;
and though the Viennese claimed that large numbers of Russians had also
been taken, I cannot regard as anything but exceptional the enormous
batches of blue uniforms that I passed on the road here. I asked these
men about their greatcoats and was not at all surprised when they said
they felt cold in them. It is nothing like such a practical winter
outfit, whether for head, body or legs, as that of the Russian soldier.

We came very well over the last part of our journey. I was sorry to
part with the friendly sanitars, who all seemed old acquaintances
by the end of the journey and invited me to take up my quarters
permanently with them. Theirs was more than ordinary kindness, as they
had shared everything they had with me, including their little sleeping
apartment. The bearer company under their orders is all composed of
Mennonites, a German religious sect from South Russia which objects
to war on principle and, being excused military service even in this
tremendous struggle, seems to be serving wholesale as ambulance
volunteers.

As there were none but soldiers about, these men helped me out with
my luggage; and through the window of the First Aid point in Tarnow
station, I saw another acquaintance waving me a welcome. This is the
last point that the railway can serve; and my friends will go back with
a full burden, which will keep the medical staff busy day and night all
the way. One of my new companions, who has been out to a village to
get milk for the wounded, has seen the shrapnel bursting; and the guns
are sounding loud and clear near the town as I write this. It is here
that the most seriously wounded must be treated at once, as a railway
journey would simply mean death for them. This is brought home to one,
if one only looks at the faces of the workers. Yet with this huge line
of operations, and the assaults which may be made at any point of it,
at any moment the nearest field hospitals may need to send off any
wounded who can be moved without delay. Though the work is being done
with danger all round, less thought is being given to it than anywhere
that I have been yet.


IV--CHRISTMAS IN AN AUSTRIAN HOSPITAL

Christmas Eve: peace on earth and good will toward men. And all through
"the still night, the holy night," the sound that means killing goes
on almost continuously. How can any one say prayers for a world which
is at war, or for himself that is a part of it? May God, who knows
everything, help each of us to bear our part and not disgrace Him, and
make us instruments to the end that He wishes.

Christmas day I spent in the hospitals. In one ward, at a local
Austrian hospital, and full of wounded, I found that almost every one
of the line of patients was of a different nationality. Going round
the room, one found first a Pole of western Galicia, then a Russian
from the Urals, next a Ruthenian (Little Russian) from eastern Galicia,
next a Magyar from Hungary, and against the wall a young German from
Westphalia. After him came an Austrian-German from Salzburg, a Serbian
from southern Hungary, another Ruthenian, an Austrian-German from
Moravia, an Austrian-German from Bohemia, and a Moravian from Moravia.

I spent a couple of hours here, talking sometimes with each of the
patients, sometimes with all. The Pole knew only Polish and the
bearded Russian, who had a bad body wound, was too tired to talk much.
Of the Ruthenians one was a frail, white-faced boy from close to the
Russian frontier who seemed, like most of his people, subdued, and
confused with the strangeness of his position in fighting against his
own people; the other was a lumpish boy without much intelligence. The
thin, bearded Hungarian, who knew no German but a little Russian, was
mostly groaning or dozing. The Salzburg Austrian was dazed and drowsy,
but at intervals talked quietly of his pleasant homeland.

The German stood out from the rest. He was a bright, vigorous boy of
twenty, had gone as a volunteer and was tremendously proud of the
spirit of the German army. He had fought against the French during
four days of pouring rain, mostly in standing water. The Bavarians,
who seemed to have quarrelled with the other troops in that part, were
making war atrociously, he said, knifing the inhabitants, insulting the
women and destroying all that came in their way. He was later moved to
the Carpathians, where one German division fought between two Austrian
ones. They advanced in snow without field kitchens, and were not
allowed to touch the pigs and poultry that they passed. However, they
had enough to eat; and they were hoping to surprise their enemy, when
the Russians fell upon them and left only the remnants of a regiment,
many of the officers also falling. He himself was wounded in both legs,
and was brought here in a cart.

Every German soldier has a prayer-book and a song-book. They constantly
sing on the march, and find it a great remedy against fatigue. Songs of
Arndt and Körner are very popular, and there is a new version of an old
song, which is perhaps the greatest favorite; it begins--

  "Oh Deutschland hoch an Ehren,
      Du heil'ges Land der Treu."

and it goes on to speak of the new exploits in east and west. There are
any number of volunteers in Germany; the women are all joining the Red
Cross; and the population is busy with every kind of work for the army;
but when I asked whether the people were keen for the war, he answered
with astonishment, "The people? The people thought that the war was
not to be avoided; but that was at the start; now it is different."
He asked if there were many other Englishmen in Russia, and when I
answered that there were some, he said, to my surprise, "The English
are everywhere, they are a fine people--_nobel_." He also asked me on
the quiet whether, when he was well, he would be sent to Siberia. He
had been told that the Russians were terrible, but had written home to
say that he had found them nothing of the sort.

Much of our talk turned on the Austrian army. The German said that it
didn't stand firm "unless it was properly led, by Germans." In Bohemia
and Moravia the regiments were mixed, Slavs and Austrian-Germans, and
according to the Moravian soldiers, were constantly quarrelling; all
the officers were Austrian-Germans, and even some of the Hungarian
regiments seemed to be commanded by Germans. The young Serbian spoke
of frequent quarrels and even brawls between Serbian and Hungarian
fellow-soldiers. The great wish of all was that the war should end.
When I said that the end was not in sight, the German exclaimed,
"More misery, more misery;" a second said, "Oh, Jammer, Jammer"
(lamentation), and a third had tears in his eyes.

In another ward I heard more of the Bohemians. There Prussia is the
antipathy. There appear to be Czech officers only in the reserve.
After the outbreak of war, the Austrians made wholesale arrests
among the educated Czechs, quite apart from party politics, and
were particularly severe on the gymnastic volunteer organizations
(_sokols_), which are popular among all the Slav nationalities of
Austria. The Bohemians had not had time to find their legs under the
new possibilities created by the Russian successes, but the Russian
troops would be sure of a cordial welcome there. The whole of my
informant's regiment had surrendered _en masse_; and even in the
mobilization of 1914, a Prague regiment had refused to march against
Russia and several of the men had been shot. I was told that the
Austrian army was much weaker in reserves than the Russian.


V--HOW THE RUSSIAN SOLDIERS DIE

I ended the day at the railway station, where the Russian wounded just
brought in were being attended to while the cannon sounded from time
to time not far off. Several lay on stretchers in the corridors and
others on pallets in the ambulance room, all still in their greatcoats
and with their kits lying beneath them. I had no conversations here;
there was too much pain, one could only sit by the sufferers or perhaps
help them to change their position. First aid had been given elsewhere,
but this was the stage when the wounds seem to be felt most. There was
wonderfully little complaining. Most were silent, except when a helping
hand was needed. One man shot through the chest told me that "By the
grace of God, it was nothing to matter." It was always a satisfaction
to the men that they had been wounded while attacking. A general walked
quickly round, distributing cigarettes, which he put in the men's
mouths and himself lighted.

In the night the cannonade sounded close to the town, but seemed
farther off again next morning.

To-day I also went round a hospital with the dressers. The work was
quickly executed, but much of it was very complicated. One does not
describe such scenes, not so much because of the ugly character of
many of the wounds, nor because of the end impending over many of the
patients. To this last the Russian soldier's attitude is simple--_gilt
es dir, oder gilt es mir_. He will speak of it as "going to America,"
the undiscovered country. But all these things come to be forgotten
in the atmosphere of work. Here all the resources of life are
going forward in their own slow way, for they can have no quicker,
handicapped and outpaced in their struggle to keep up with the work of
death.

General Radko Dmitriev is a short and sturdily built man with quick
brown eyes and a profile reminiscent of Napoleon. He talks quickly
and shortly, sometimes drums on the table with his fingers, and now
and then makes a rapid dash for the matches. The daily visit of the
Chief of the Staff is short, because, as the General says on his
return, simple business is done quickly. Every piece of his incisive
conversation holds together as part of a single and clear view of the
whole military position, of which the watchword is "Forward."

It is only the heavy rains that have saved the retreating Austrians
from further losses. The roads are so broken up and so deep with mud
that any quick movement is impossible. This gives the occasion for a
useful rest. The cold weather--and it is freezing now--will be welcomed
on this side; and the Russian winter kits, which have already been
served out, are immeasurably better than the thin blue greatcoats of
the draggled and demoralized Austrians.

Numbers of Austrian units are so reduced that they are only shadows
of what they were, and some seem to have disappeared altogether. The
ordinary drafts came in some time ago and are now exhausted--such is
the testimony of Austrian officers. The new Russian recruits, on the
contrary, will join the colors shortly.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the beginning of the war, Bosnians, who are really Serbians,
surrendered in large numbers. Then the Poles began to come in, and now
the Bohemians. The Hungarians are sure to go on to the end; but the
Roumanian and Italian soldiers of Austria have also come over very
easily. In front of Cracow a Russian officer under fire came on a whole
number of Bohemians who were singing the "Sokol" songs and shouted a
greeting as they came into the Russian lines.

       *       *       *       *       *

These wholesale surrenders have, I think, an extremely interesting
political significance. When governments turned the whole people into
an army, it was clear that the army was also being turned into the
people; but it was not clear how the people could express itself when
under army discipline. These surrenders, in their general character
and in their differences of detail, are a picture of the feelings and
aspirations of the various nationalities which are bundled together
under the name of Austria.

       *       *       *       *       *

At this Staff, as at the General Staff, life was very simple. We all
met twice a day for a plain meal without any alcohol; there was plenty
of conversation, but it was that of men engaged in responsible work;
any news from outside was welcome, especially from the western allies,
and there was full appreciation and sympathy for their hard task.

There was plenty of news from other quarters of the Russian front,
and one could have a much juster and fuller perspective of how things
were going than anywhere behind the army; the two things which stood
out even more here than elsewhere were, on the one hand, the immensity
of the sacrifices which have been asked and are being cheerfully made
by Russia, and, on the other, the sense of quiet confidence as to the
ultimate result.

FOOTNOTE:

[16] All numerals relate to stories herein told--not to chapters from
original sources.




THE ROMANCE OF THE FRENCH FOREIGN LEGION

_The "Glorious Rascals"_

_Told by E. S. and G. F. Lees_

  The reinstatement by the King of Lieutenant-Colonel John Ford
  Elkington in the Royal Warwickshire Regiment, after he had served
  for twenty-two months with conspicuous bravery in the French
  Foreign Legion, has once more drawn attention to this unique
  military organization. As the writers of this story show, "La
  Légion Etrangère" of our Allies the French is literally steeped
  in romance, and it is therefore the romantic side of the heroic
  yet often maligned legionaries which they have set forth most
  prominently. Practically every man in the corps has a history, if
  he could only be induced to tell it, and in the present war the
  Legion has covered itself with glory, as shown in this story in the
  _Wide World Magazine_.


I--STORY OF "THE GLORIOUS BLACKGUARDS"

Budding novelists in search of ideas for tales of adventure, short
story writers who have come to the end of their stock of episodes,
and all who wield the pen either for amusement or instruction, may be
recommended to turn over the pages that tell the story of the Foreign
Legion. There is a whole literature at their disposal, covering
a period of more than eighty years and written in almost as many
languages as there are nationalities in this remarkable military body,
and it teems from beginning to end with incidents which respond to the
entire gamut of human emotions.

The Foreign Legion, which in time of peace is composed of between eight
and ten thousand men, but which now probably exceeds the strength of
an army corps, since no fewer than thirty-two thousand odd foreigners
enrolled themselves from August 21st, 1914, to April 1st, 1915, is,
as it were, a microcosm of the world. According to official French
returns, there were in its ranks at the beginning of the war nine
thousand five hundred Alsatians and Lorrainers, fourteen hundred and
sixty-two Belgians, three hundred and seventy-nine English, three
thousand three hundred and ninety-three Russians, four thousand nine
hundred and thirteen Italians, thirteen hundred and eighty Greeks,
five hundred and ninety-one Luxembourgers, nine hundred and sixty-nine
Spaniards, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-seven Swiss, thirteen
hundred and sixty-nine Austro-Hungarians, one thousand and twenty-seven
Germans, five hundred and ninety-two Turks, six hundred Americans, and
four thousand two hundred and fifty-four of various other nationalties,
including, in all probability, as at the time of the Empire, Poles,
Albanians, Croatians, Illyrians, and negroes.

In this world-in-little all classes of society are represented--the
prince and the pauper, the scholar and the illiterate, the one-time
brilliant officer, prominent financier, and ecclesiastic. All of them
are brought to a common level with the lowest of the low through
inherent human weakness, some foolish act committed in haste and
repented of at leisure, or else through some misfortune or other over
which the man who is "down on his luck" has no control whatever.

The social outcast, the deserter, the gambler, the fugitive from
justice, the man who has been crossed in love, the desperate man
who, on second thoughts, prefers the ranks of the Legion to suicide,
the man who has a pure love of soldiering or an inordinate taste for
adventure, the out-and-out failure who has been told by his family to
"make good" and clean off his debt to society--all of them are found
here, living under the shadow of mystery, undergoing the most arduous
life imaginable, and, for the most part, suffering in silence. So
heterogenous are they that the legionaries, quite unjustly, have been
called many ill names. Through the faults of a few, who necessarily
find their way into such an organization, they have all been
indiscriminately labelled with such epithets as "band of criminals,"
"degenerates," "troop of dishonoured foreigners," "heartless
mercenaries," and so on. But many sins can be forgiven the soldiers of
the Legion when we read their history aright, and come to understand
their Spartan characters in the hour of trial and danger. And it is for
that reason that, despite their antecedents and shortcomings, they are
now generally known in French military circles as "The Heroic Rascals,"
or as "The Glorious Blackguards."

The Foreign Legion can trace its origin to the days of the Scottish
archers, employed by Charles VII. of France, and to those of the Swiss,
Albanian, Flemish, Walloon, German, Italian, and other mercenaries in
the service of his successors. At the time of the Convention, in 1793,
an appeal was made to the nations of Europe for soldiers, with the
result that several foreign regiments fought with the revolutionary
armies. All these, however, were disbanded at the fall of Napoleon.
When Louis XVIII. came to the throne he created the Royal Foreign
Legion in their place, but they gradually merged into the regular army.
However, after the 1830 Revolution the Foreign Legion was revived,
and ever since they have taken part in nearly every foreign campaign
in which France has been engaged--in the conquest of Algeria, in the
Crimean War, in Mexico, Tongking, Formosa, Madagascar, and Morocco.


II--ASYLUM OF BRAVE UNFORTUNATES

Admission to the Legion is not the result of the efforts of the
recruiting sergeant. All the men are volunteers, and although all
classes and all nationalties are welcome to join they are not unduly
encouraged to do so. There have been cases in which men who have come
to enlist at the military headquarters in Paris have been told of the
disadvantages they would have to encounter, and advised "to think the
matter over seriously" before signing away their liberty for a period
of five years. Yet, almost to a man, they have come back to undergo the
extremely rigorous medical examination--the only examination, by the
way, with which they are troubled. For, as regards their real name and
nationality, no proofs are required. The authorities show no curiosity
whatsoever about a man's past. They take it for granted that he has a
very good reason for wishing to disappear for a while from the society
of his relatives and friends and become merged with others of like mind
in a semi-anonymous body, training, marching, and fighting without
respite.

The military authorities formerly used to pay the legionaries
the princely salary of a half-penny a day (recently raised to
twopence-halfpenny), and their kit does not even include socks, yet
they are expected to possess sufficient physical vigour to march a
distance of twenty to thirty-two miles, over rocky, slippery ground and
through jungles, in less than eight hours, halting only ten minutes
each hour, and with a load of seventy to eighty pounds. This is a
terrible test of speed and endurance, yet one out of which these men
come, through systematic training, with flying colours, and of which
they are all of them justly proud. "No questions asked, but strict
obedience and iron discipline"--this might be the motto of the corps,
in which such famous soldiers as MacMahon, Canrobert, Chanzy, De
Négrier, Servière, and Villebois-Mareuil have been officers. In spite
of this display of delicacy, however, many a man's story leaks out. He
may be as silent as the Sphinx for years, yet the time comes when his
taciturnity is overcome through some little incident, and his secret,
or part of it, as in a case related by Mr. Frederic Martyn, in his
"Life in the Legion," is out.

It was during the French campaign in Mexico, says Mr. Martyn, who
himself served for five years in the Legion. A large city having been
captured, the general in command wished to propitiate the inhabitants
by celebrating a spectacular military High Mass in the cathedral. When
all the troops had been assembled, it was found that the clergy had
gone on strike. In the face of this dilemma, the general was just about
to abandon the ceremony when a corporal of the Legion stepped forward
and, saluting, said, "_Mon général_, I was a bishop before I became a
corporal, and I will celebrate the Mass." Another eye-witness of this
incident states that the ex-bishop also offered to preach a sermon, but
the general considered that the Mass alone was sufficient.

M. Maurer, a former officer in the Legion and now President of the
Mutual Aid Society for former officers, N. C. O.'s, and soldiers of the
foreign regiments in Paris, informed us that he remembered this bishop,
whose fall was due to drink.

This recalls another ecclesiastical anecdote. At the time of the
Fashoda incident a legionary was drowned at Zarzis whilst attempting
to save a fisherman. His comrades made a coffin out of the only wood
available, some pieces of old packing-cases, on one of which--the
portion, as it happened, which we used for the top--were the words,
"Keep the contents dry." Again no priest was thought to be there to
perform the last rites over the dead, until an Italian private stepped
forward, revealed his priestly identity, and recited the Burial Service
by heart.


III--FROM PRINCE TO LEGIONAIRE--THE KAISER'S COUSIN

The fall from bishopric to the rank and file of the Foreign Legion is
not the biggest social drop on record in the Legion. In 1897 a young
man of twenty-six, who gave his name as Albrecht Friedrich Nornemann,
was accepted for service. After ten months in barracks at Géryville
he broke down under the severe training, was sent into hospital, and
in a few weeks died of phthisis. A day or two later the regiment was
astonished to learn that a German war-vessel had entered the harbour,
entrusted with the astounding mission of fetching the body of Albrecht
Friedrich, cousin-german of Prince Henry of Prussia, and consequently
cousin of the Kaiser, who, having ordered the remains to be brought
back to Hamburg, probably alone knew the prince's secret.

Six years before this remarkable incident, which is vouched for by
more than one authority, another man of mysterious origin--who, if
he was not actually a prince of the realm, was in all probability of
royal blood on one side--was discovered in a Tongking battalion. A
sergeant and the owner of an illustrious name, since his father was
a general and Minister to a European monarch, it was noticed that he
never received any letters from his father, but that every month the
paymaster handed him a thousand francs which he never failed to share
with his less well-to-do comrades. Why was he there, and what was the
mystery surrounding his birth? was often the mental reflection of
those who enjoyed his friendship and generosity. Only after his death
did they get an inkling of the truth. His military book stated that
his name was V. de S----, son of V. de S----, General of Division and
Minister of War. "There was no mention of his mother's name," said
a superior officer to M. de Pouvourville, who tells the story, "and
there can be little doubt that she was of too illustrious a rank to
acknowledge a son the circumstances of whose birth had placed him
beyond the pale."

Some excellent stories of life in the Legion were told to the authors
of this article by the above named M. Maurer.

One of his orderlies was Graf X----, the son of the then Governor of
Brandenburg, but he could never learn in what circumstances this man
had fallen from his high estate. It was different in the case of his
particular chum, a young Englishman of distinguished manners, who spoke
several languages and was an accomplished musician, though the secret
of his life did not come out until several years after M. Maurer had
retired and returned to Paris. One day, when passing the Madeleine,
he saw a splendid equipage, drawn by a pair of magnificent greys,
with silver harness, standing outside the church, and, lo and behold!
sitting in the carriage was his old chum. Hailing him by the name by
which he had always known him, M. Maurer was astonished to see his
friend put his finger to his lips. The next moment he was invited to
enter the carriage, and, with an invitation to dinner, off they drove
to a fashionable restaurant in the Champs Elysees. Over dinner M.
Maurer's former comrade told him his real name and story. A young man
of good family, he had started his career with an excellent position in
the Bank of England. One day, when ten thousand pounds had been slid
into his hands, a sudden temptation came over him, a foolish desire
to have a flutter at "Monte." So he took the earliest opportunity of
leaving London. As was only to be expected, the inevitable happened;
he lost at the tables every penny of the sum he had embezzled. Aware
of the disgrace that awaited him when the theft was discovered, he
enlisted in the Foreign Legion.

"Now, it is a well-known fact," concluded M. Maurer, "that the sins
of a man who has served his full time in the Legion are wiped off the
slate, and I suppose that something like this must have happened in
the case of my young friend. I have no doubt that his family restored
the money. Anyway, he attained his rehabilitation. He is the bearer
of a very well-known name, and to-day occupies an important--a _very_
important--post in public affairs in England."


IV--THE ROMANCE OF THE EURASIAN

Another little romance revolving round the life of a legionary, whose
birth was enveloped in mystery, was told some years ago by a British
soldier who served in the Legion. After an engagement at Cao-Thuong,
there was found on one of the dead, sewn in a belt, six British war
medals and a letter addressed to the narrator. Judge of his surprise
when he found that it was in perfect English, of which he had never
for a moment suspected his comrade-in-arms had a knowledge, and
that it contained the statement that the medals had been won by the
writer's father and grandfather in India. His mother, the writer
explained, was a native, and therefore he, as a Eurasian, although born
in wedlock, was ineligible for the British Army. As his tastes were
wholly military, and the greatest desire of his life was to add to his
forebears' collection of medals, he had enlisted in the Legion.

The mental attitude of the man who regards the Foreign Legion as a _pis
aller_ is a common trait among its members; it is often, indeed, the
last resource of those who have met with life's disappointments.

There was once an officer of the German army who had invented a new
type of cannon, and could not get its merits recognised, either by his
own country or by France, as rapidly as he would have liked, or receive
prompt remuneration for his work. Straightway, therefore, he went and
joined the Légion Etrangère. Some little time later, in 1895, the
French authorities, waking up to the possibility of the value of the
work of so eminent an engineer, approached him on the subject, but by
then he had become thoroughly soured. He declined to have anything to
do with them, and with the air of one whose genius has been recognised
too late hastily returned to his kitchen, where he had long carried out
the duties of regimental cook.

In the barracks at Sidi-bel-Abbes, where the most cordial and
frequently rowdy _bonne camaraderie_ reigns, failures in art, science,
literature, and every other walk in life may be found by hundreds.
Special cases like that of the gallant Lieutenant-Colonel Elkington,
who, after being cashiered by general court-martial, joined the Legion
as a simple private at the beginning of the present war and won his
way to distinction, are rare. He was in the thick of the fighting in
the Champagne country, lay for ten months in hospital badly wounded,
and before regaining the confidence of his King and country was
personally decorated with the Médaille Militaire and the Croix de
Guerre by an officer attached to General Joffre's staff. To find an
exact parallel to this instance of reinstatement in the British Army
would be difficult. Among the legionaires, however, there have been
quite a number of men of the type of the American Daly, an artist and
pupil of Gérôme, who lost at Monte Carlo everything his father had
given him to pay for his art training in Europe; scores, too, of such
enigmas as that fine young fellow who joined the Legion in 1893, served
in Tongking, and left in 1898, at the end of his time, when by chance
his superiors discovered that he had been first tenor at the Theâtre de
la Monnaie at Brussels. Not a note had he sung, not a single reference
to music had he made whilst in the regiment! Ah, what stories some of
these ne'er-do-wells, drunkards, comedians, and gentlemen with fine
manners could tell if only they would consent to open their lips!


V--WHY GERMANS HATE THE FOREIGN LEGION

Many of them, of course, have no tale worth telling, and among these
are the deserters from other armies. If we include the Alsatians and
Lorrainers who join to avoid service under the hated German flag, they
form a very big class indeed. Nearly every year more than a thousand
men of the annexed provinces and more than a thousand Germans flocked
to the French standard, with the result that the Legion has always
been disliked and slandered by Germans. We have before us seven
closely-printed pages forming a list of books and pamphlets written
by German writers, who, filled with Pan-Germanist hatred and inspired
by the virulent libels of anonymous scribes, have endeavoured for the
past twenty years to throw mud at a military organization into which so
many of their countrymen escaped. This prompts new thought. If German
soldiers are so glad to join a body in which life is "a veritable hell
upon earth," where men "never taste meat, but only bread and rice,"
where they "sleep on the bare ground," where "noses, ears, and fingers
are cut off for the slightest fault," where they are "buried in the
sand to the waist with an iron cage over them filled with hungry
rats"--the last idea was stolen by the German slanderers from Octave
Mirbeau's "Jardin des Supplices"--what must their life in their own
army be like?

As a matter of fact, many Germans who have served in the Legion have
had, on their return home, nothing but good to say about it, and have
become voluntary recruiting agents for France, hence an increased
bitterness on the part of the Huns. A few years ago deserters from the
German army became so numerous that a society was formed at Munich,
bearing the name "The German Protection Society Against the Foreign
Legion." Several times men were arrested for trying to persuade their
comrades to join the Legion, but they had to be released, as it was
found that they were pure-born Teutons.

And now let us apply the supreme test and look into the fighting
record of the legionaries. As military experts are agreed that they
are among the finest fighters in the world. Innumerable instances of
their stubbornness can be given, and it is the quality which has made
them, time after time, invaluable as a "stiffening" whenever it has
been considered necessary to draft a number of soldiers of the Legion
into a regiment of less experienced troops. "The most pusillanimous of
them," said an old French officer, who had seen much service in Africa,
to us, "will hold out to the death when side by side with a legionary
and inspired by his superb courage."

One of the feats of the Foreign Legion was the taking of Son-Tay on
December 16th, 1883, a square brick _citadelle_ protected by a hundred
cannon, a moat five yards wide, and hedges of bamboo, and defended
by twenty-five thousand men--ten thousand Chinese regulars, ten
thousand Black Flags, and five thousand Annamites. As an example of
pure bravery, look at the thirty-six days' siege of Tuyen-Quan, which
in 1885 was held by six hundred legionaries against twenty thousand
Chinese. Few celebrated sieges have attained and none surpassed in
horror what took place there. On the occasion of the Camerone affair,
in Mexico, sixty-five legionaries, without food or shelter, in an open
court and under a tropical sun, held in check for more than ten hours
two thousand enemies, three hundred of whom they killed. The word
"Camerone" is embroidered on the flag of the Foreign Legion, and if
you go to the Invalides you will see on one of the walls, in letters
of gold, the names of the three officers who directed that handful of
heroes, with the date of the fight: "Lieutenant Vilain, Sub-Lieutenant
Mandet, and Captain Danjou; April 30th, 1863."


VI--FRANCE'S TRIBUTE TO THE LEGION

The bravery of the Foreign Legion has been so conspicuous that on
February 16th, 1906, M. Eugène Etienne, then Minister of War, proposed
that the flag of the 1st Foreign Regiment be decorated with the Legion
of Honour, "in recognition of the acts of devotion, courage, and
abnegation which a troop, ever on a war footing, renders to the country
in the defence of its Colonial possessions." This was done, and at the
Invalides, in a special case, can be seen an old flag of the regiment
bearing the date September 24th, 1862, a flag which had been retaken
from the enemy, and on the staff of which hangs the Cross of the Legion
of Honour, the finest tribute which France can pay to the glorious
deeds of the Foreign Legion.

During the present war a further distinction has been granted the
marching regiment of the Legion. Authority has just been given the men
to wear the _fourragère_, or braid, over the left shoulder. The flag of
this regiment had already been decorated with the Croix de Guerre.

The latest recorded exploit of this gallant corps was the capture,
at the point of the bayonet, of a fortified village strongly held by
the enemy. The men of the Legion held out so vigorously that all the
enemy's counter-attacks were beaten off, and seven hundred and fifty
German prisoners were sent to the rear.

The British residents in Paris and other parts of France who
volunteered for service in the French army and trained at the Magic
City in 1914 were drafted into the Foreign Legion, and the survivors
have reason to be proud of their old corps.

But the complete history of the doings of the Legion during this war
can only be written some time hence. Suffice it to say, in addition
to the above facts, that they have been mentioned in army orders no
fewer than three times--a distinction not won by any other French
regiment. At one time, during the Champagne campaign, they advanced
eighteen kilomètres into the enemy's front, and if only there had been
reinforcements to back them up there is no doubt a great victory would
have been won. The many personal heroic deeds, too, necessitate names
and details which will not yet pass the Censor's scrutiny. But one
incident, in conclusion, perhaps we may mention, as recorded to us by
M. Maurer.

"One of my former men, an Alsatian peasant of the lowest type, speaking
only of his own _patois_ and unable to read or write, came to Paris
after serving fifteen years in the Foreign Legion. I was instrumental
in getting him a place in a public wash-house, where he drew a handcart
for the sum of four francs a day, which, by the by, he promptly spent
in drink as soon as it was handed to him. As soon as war was declared
he was off again to his _métier_. He returned on leave after ten months
in the trenches, and came to see me. Judge of my surprise when I found
he had become a sub-lieutenant, wearing the Croix de Guerre and Croix
Militaire with the three palms! Still unable to speak more than a dozen
words in French he explained in his dialect, when I inquired what he
had done to acquire such distinctions, that he had killed fifty-two
Boches in the most dramatic circumstances. Night after night he had
slipped out of his trench, and like a snake in the grass crawled across
'No Man's Land' to the enemy's listening-posts, which are invariably
under the charge of experienced officers and picked men. He did his
work silently and expeditiously--with a knife. A terrible but true
anecdote of this relentless war!"




ADVENTURES OF WOMEN WHO FACE DEATH ON BATTLEGROUNDS

_Little Stories of Woman's Indomitable Courage_

  This is a group of little tales of brave women--direct from the
  battlefields. They are but typical of the noble deeds of the
  mothers and daughters of all nations throughout the war. It has
  been estimated that forty thousand women have fought in the
  armies--thousands of them in soldiers' uniforms. The first three
  stories told here are from the _New York American_, and the fourth
  is from the _New York World_.


I--STORY OF ENGLISHWOMAN WHO RISKED LIFE ON RUSSIAN BATTLEFRONT

Mrs. Hilda Wynne has youth, beauty, wealth and fascination--she cast
them all into the great pool of the war in Europe, and added bravery to
them--a limitless bravery. She wears the Croix de Guerre, the gift of
France. King Albert of Belgium decorated her with the Order of Leopold,
and Russia honored her with the Order of St. George. These rare
distinctions she won by unique service. She drove her ambulance between
the first trenches. Back and forth she went, driving her automobile
at furious pace with the fire pouring upon her from the allies on one
side and the Germans on the other, but a mile separating them. Her
unit worked between the first trenches, the only workers permitted
to operate on this danger line. Mrs. Wynne and her organization, the
Bevan-Wynne Unit, have saved more than 25,000 lives of wounded that but
for her speedy aid would have been lost. She then came to America for
the specific purpose of interesting Americans in the needs of Russian
soldiers.

_Told by Hilda Wynne, herself_

I have looked into the eyes of death and seen there many things.

Looking upon the human carnage I have witnessed, from this distance and
in the little breathing space I have taken from service to make you
Americans know the Russians and their needs better, I testify that I
have seen thousands of heroic acts, but the bravest act happened on the
Russian front.

I saw two aviators go up to certain death. They were a Russian and a
Frenchman. Both were little men. They went up to meet twenty German
aeroplanes. It was suicidal. But they had been ordered to go--and
theirs was the spirit of the gallant six hundred. I stood near them as
they made ready to go. They said nothing. That is one of the lessons
you learn in war--not to waste time nor words.

They got their machines ready as a rider tests his saddle straps and
stirrups before starting for his morning gallop through the park.
A little pothering and fixing of the machinery and they had gone.
They went straight up and began blazing away at the German planes. I
watched and the cords of my heart tightened, for the German planes,
looking like great gray birds with wings wide spread, came closer
and closer. They surrounded them. They formed a solid double circle
about them. Then they began to fire. And I turned and covered my eyes
with my hands, for out of that solid, ominous group two dots detached
themselves and fell. A few seconds later what had been aeroplanes were
splintered wood and what had been men a broken mass covered by smoking
rags.

While this was the bravest act I saw in two and a half years on the
firing line, I readily recall the most pathetic. It was the second
line of men in the Russian trenches. They were unarmed soldiers. There
were no guns for them. They took their places there expecting that the
man in front might drop, and the second line man could pick up his gun
and take his place. The reports that some of the Russian soldiers have
desperately fought with switches I have no doubt is true.

I have seen many of the allies die. They all die bravely. At Dixmude
when the fusiliers arrived 8,000 and went out 4,000 there was
magnificent courage in death. The Frenchman dies calling upon his God.
The Englishman says nothing or feebly jests; just turns his face to the
wall and is still. The Russian is mystic and secretive. The Russian
lives behind a veil of reserve. You never fully know him. In the last
moments you know by his rapt look that his soul is in communion with
his God.

One of the deepest, unalterable truths of the war is the German power
of hatred. It is past measuring. An example occurred at Dixmude. When
we had been there three days we were driven out. I took my car filled
with the wounded across a bridge just in time. A second after we had
crossed there was a roar, then a crash. A shot had torn the bridge to
pieces. Three weeks later to our hospital was brought a wounded German.

"I know you," he said. "We nearly got you at the bridge at Dixmude."

"I remember," I said.

That man's eyes used to follow me in a strange way. Build no beautiful
theories of his national animosity disappearing, or being swallowed
up in his gratitude. There was no such thought in his mind. The eyes
said: "I wish I had killed you. But since I didn't I wish I might have
another chance."

This after I had driven away a group of zouaves who had taken
everything from him, including his iron cross, and who were debating
whether to toss him into the canal then or that night.

It is quite true that the Germans fire upon hospitals. Don't believe
any disclaimers of such acts. There have been many of them. The
aeroplanes were circling about and above a rough hospital we had
constructed and we had to leave it in a hurry. We told the patients of
their danger and hurried them into ambulances to take them to a safer
spot. One of the patients was a German. Both his arms had been shot
away. He was in great pain. I went to his cot and offered to help him.

"Lean on me," I said. But he turned upon me a baleful look.

"No," he said, staggering to his feet. His tormented body reeled as he
made his way to the door. "No," he repeated. "I will take no help from
the enemy."

It is true that a shell has burst at my feet. It has happened dozens
of times. That isn't alarming. If it burst a few feet away I should be
killed. Shells glance down and under the ground. That saves one if he
is near it. A shell bursting near one is a commonplace in war.

The shells have a disturbing way about them, more disturbing to
your plans than your equanimity. Shells prevented my having a nice
comfortable illness. In southern Russia one can get little to eat.
Coarse black bread is the chief food. It causes unpleasant disorders.
I, afflicted with one of them, arranged a table in the corner of
my tent. I placed remedies on the table, undressed and turned in,
intending to have a cozy illness of a few days. But as I lay there came
an angry buzzing. A shell hissed through, carrying away a corner of my
tent. That ended my illness. I had no more time to think of it.

The greatest peril I encountered was not from shells. I have said that
one becomes used to them. One of the greatest dangers I faced was on
a dark night drive along a precipice in the Caucasus. It was while
the plan to bring troops through Persia to Russia was expected to be
successful. I went ahead with some ambulances. It was necessary to
take two Russian officers across the mountain. I offered my services.
The road was an oddly twisting one. On one side was a high wall, on
the other a precipice whose depth no one calculated. But as I allowed
myself to look into it at twilight I could see no bottom to it. We
started on the all night drive at dusk. The precipice remained with us,
a foot away, most of the distance. Had my car skidded twelve inches the
story would have been different.

Then, too, I wandered once within the Turkish lines, mistaking them for
our own. But amidst a courteous silence I was allowed to discover my
mistake and escape without harm.

I think I owe my opportunity to do my bit, in the way I have, to the
fact that I arrived in Flanders a few hours before the fight and the
officers were too busy to send me back. I had seven automobiles,
and knew how to use them. I took them to Dixmude and offered the
automobiles and my services to the cause. I established headquarters
at Furnes, which is seven miles from Nieuport, eight from Dixmude and
twenty from Ypres. I drove along the Yser Canal to the parts of the
field that were under the heaviest fire, for there, I knew, my cars
and I would be most needed. For a year I worked for the relief of the
wounded of the French armies. Then I went to Russia, where I found the
need of help and the sacrifice of life because of lack of that help,
almost inconceivable. The French armies have 6,600 ambulances. The
Germans have 6,200. Russia, with a firing line of 6,000 miles has but
600 motor ambulances.

I established dressing stations in the mountains. Some of these were
10,000 feet above the sea level. There, on the canvas stretched between
two horses, the wounded were brought, or so they started. For many of
them died in the long journey, every step of which was torture to a
wounded man.

The most exciting experience I ever had was on the Galician border.
We could approach the battle line only along the Tranapol road, which
ran for fifteen miles directly under German guns. I was speeding along
it with an ambulance full of wounded soldiers when a shell struck the
roadside and exploded, tearing a great hole in the earth fifty feet
away. The concussion stopped us. Then we went on. I travel on my luck.
Some time, I suppose, I shall travel too far.

I have given all my fortune to the work. That is what we should
do--give not what we can afford, but all we have.


II--STORY OF THE "SPY-TRAPPERS" OF ENGLAND WHO CAUGHT CARL LODY

Everybody has heard of the tremendous ramifications of the German
military spy system, which had every move of England's army and navy
under observation, every gun emplacement mapped out and knew every
order given to the army before it reached the subordinate officers.

Englishmen were powerless to shake off this spy danger, which
penetrated into every branch of national life, but English women took
up the matter, brought the most dangerous spies to trial, put the
others under armed guard and in various other ways made the lives of
spies and suspected spies a burden to them.

They have proved that women are the only efficient "spy trappers." The
leaders of the undertaking are women of title, for they alone would
have the authority, means and prestige to carry out such a difficult
and far-reaching work.

The organizer and "chairman" of the committee that has been rounding up
the spies is Lady Glanusk, wife of a peer and officer, a woman of keen
mind and very determined, yet tactful personality. Other members are
the Duchess of Wellington, who is president; the Duchess of Beaufort,
the Duchess of Sutherland, the Marchioness of Sligo, Countess Bathurst,
the Countess of Lanesborough, Viscountess Massereene and Ferrard,
Viscountess Combermere, Viscountess Cobham, Lady Vincent, Lady Leith of
Fyvie, Mrs. Harold Baring and others.

Among them are some of the most notably beautiful women in English
society and others who are distinguished by their winning personality.
Perhaps the most striking beauty is the Viscountess Massereene and
Ferrard, whose husband is the chief of a celebrated Irish family.
Equally attractive in her way is the young Duchess of Sutherland, whose
husband is the largest landowner in Scotland and the United Kingdom.

Another member of the committee noted for her beauty is Mrs. Harold
Baring, who was formerly Miss Marie Churchill, of New York. Her husband
belongs to the famous English banking family that possesses four
peerages. Lady Leith of Fyvie, is another American born member. She was
Miss Marie January, of St. Louis. Womanly intuition and womanly guile
exercised by these attractive "spy trappers," on many social occasions,
have led many Germans to make admissions they would never have made to
a man.

Before the war thousands of Germans were in positions of trust in
England, ranging from heads of banks down to such positions as butlers
in prominent English families and headwaiters in leading hotels. Many
people believe that German butlers in the employ of British Cabinet
ministers and British generals have been the most important agents
for conveying military information to the enemy. Standing silent and
discreet behind their employers and their guests at the table, they
listened to many military secrets and they also had other opportunities
for gathering information.

One of the fair members of the committee dined one evening at the house
of an English general with a small party of persons highly placed in
military and official life. When the general joined the ladies in the
drawing room after dinner the fascinating "spy trapper" drew him aside
and said:

"General, before I go, I want you to arrest your butler and search his
belongings. He is a German spy," she said.

"But Lady ----," said the general in amazement, "he has been with me
for ten years. The man is an excellent butler."

"No doubt," said the lady, "but he is also an excellent spy. Never
speak to me again if I am wrong."

The butler's room was searched and many notes of an incriminating
character were found. The lack of positive evidence that he had sent
information to the German Government saved his life, but he was sent to
prison with a host of other German spies.

It is generally understood that Carl Hans Lody, the German spy executed
in the Tower of London, was brought to trial through the efforts of the
women's committee, although the members disclaim the achievement.

Lody was an officer of the German naval reserve who had resided some
years in the United States, married and deserted his wife there. He
was engaged for a time as an agent of an English tourist agency in
America, work which gave him an excellent opportunity for watching
military preparations.

Last August he obtained an American passport from the American Embassy
in Berlin, under the name of Charles A. Inglis, of New York, American
citizen. He went to England with instructions to obtain information
concerning the movements of the English fleet for the German Government.

In the disguise of an American tourist, he visited the principal
seaports of the United Kingdom. While he was viewing the romantic
scenery in the vicinity of Edinburgh, an attractive member of the
ladies' committee made his acquaintance. Under the influence of
sympathetic society Lody became more communicative than discretion
warranted.

Behind the superficial American accent the natural German accent
revealed itself in the warmth of confidence. A few days later, Lody
was arrested and letters, which he had written to Germany, giving
information concerning English naval movements and which had been
seized in the mails, were produced.

Lody admitted that he was acting as a spy. After a short trial he was
condemned to be shot in the old Tower of London. He met his fate very
bravely.

The "ladies' committee" has hunted down all German headwaiters and
waiters employed in the principal English hotels and restaurants and
caused them to be removed to detention camps. These men, owing to the
peculiar character of their work, enjoyed an excellent opportunity for
meeting persons of all the important classes of society, and in the
free expansion that ordinarily takes place at the table all kinds of
confidences were exchanged within their hearing.

Many Germans of high social position and great wealth, some of them
naturalized British subjects, have been pursued by the relentless
"ladies' committee." Professor Arthur Schuster, a born German, but a
naturalized Englishman, was surprised at his luxurious country seat,
when a band of detectives descended on him and seized his private
wireless apparatus.

Lady Glanusk explained to the correspondent of this newspaper some of
the aims and labors of the committee.

She has turned the drawing and reception rooms of her fine house, at
No. 30 Bruton street, Mayfair, into offices for the committee.

"Owing to the fact," said Lady Glanusk, "that no serious effort has
been made by our menkind to round up the 73,000 alien enemies in our
midst, I felt the call to start a protest by women, as it is women who
are the greatest sufferers by war. My husband and two sons are fighting
at the front and thousands of women can say very much the same.

"Ten days after I issued my appeal to the women of England I had formed
my committee with the definite object that all alien-born enemies,
whether German, Austrian or Turk, of military age, be forthwith
interned, whether naturalized or not. Other alien enemies above
military age or under should be removed at least twenty miles from the
coasts and kept under surveillance.

"I consider that women as spies and decoy ducks are more dangerous than
men.

"To such an extent have the women of England been roused that in the
first couple of weeks more than 200,000 signatures to the petition to
be presented to Parliament were obtained.

"Alien enemies, Germans and Austrians particularly, were spread all
along the coast towns and it was impossible to know whether or not
they were in constant communication with the enemy. For my part, I
would like to see as many as possible of these 'useless non-combatants'
dumped right onto German soil. It would be amusing to think of the
embarrassment of the German authorities having to find food and shelter
for something like 70,000 fresh mouths. Another trouble is the shameful
favoritism shown to wealthy and highly placed Anglo-Germans while their
humbler compatriots are interned without ado.

"Out of the petition of protest has grown what we have named 'the
anti-German League,' by which it is resolved that no member will employ
or sanction the employment of any German or alien enemy. Members will
further refuse to deal with any shops or establishments selling any
German or alien enemy goods. As the members of our committee are highly
influential people the movement should be effective and will continue
for several years. Further, no pains will be spared to improve the
usefulness of British hotel waiters and other hotel and restaurant
employees.

"If every British woman will realize that it is shameful and
treacherous to give financial help to the Germans there will be no
future need to protect the public from this alien peril, for the German
Empire will never be in a position to menace us again, for war cannot
be waged except by a commercially flourishing nation."

Lady Glanusk is a typical Englishwoman, full of energy, go and spirit.
She is tall and stately, with a beautiful complexion. She received the
American correspondent cordially and with a friendly grasp of the hand.

During the interview Mr. Joynson-Hicks, Member of Parliament, and just
recently appointed Chairman of the Unionist Parliamentary Committee
lately formed to inquire into this alien enemy question, was present,
as was also Lord Euston, heir to the Dukedom of Grafton.


III--STORY OF DAUGHTERS OF ENGLISH NOBILITY WHO WORK IN TRENCHES

Many beautiful girls of the most delicate breeding have gone to the
front to nurse the wounded--to see the worst horrors of this most
horrible of wars.

It must not be assumed that they have merely gone to the base hospitals
to attend to the wounded soldiers brought to them from the front and
carried to them through the dangerous area. Some at least have gone
right to the trenches into the midst of the inferno of bullets and
shells and poisonous gases, where the air is filled with the groans of
the dying and the stench of the unburied dead and where the very soil
trembles from the force of the new and devilish explosives that reduce
humanity to a pulp.

The sights that these delicately reared girls must witness can only be
hinted at. Many strong men have turned sick at the same experience,
and even veteran soldiers are only able to endure their surroundings
by smoking the strongest kind of tobacco. How the spoiled darlings of
society will come through their terrible experience must be one of the
most interesting problems of the war.

One of the most strikingly beautiful girls at the front is Miss Gladys
Nelson, daughter of Sir William and Lady Nelson, who have a house noted
for its art treasures in Hill Street, Mayfair, the most aristocratic
quarter of London.

Sir William Nelson is a great railroad magnate, having large
enterprises of this character in the colonies and other parts of the
world. He is probably one of the wealthiest men in the United Kingdom.
He has two sons in the army, and four daughters married to army
officers. His only unmarried daughter, Miss Gladys, determined that she
would not do less for her country than any of her family.

Miss Nelson is the purest and most refined type of English beauty.
She is tall, lithe and athletic, with beautiful golden hair and a
very delicate, fair complexion. This exquisite daughter of millions
is actually running a motor ambulance from the trenches in the North
of France to the base hospital. She helps to carry the poor wounded
soldiers in her car back of the firing line and then drives them to
the base hospital. She has been repeatedly under fire and runs the
risk of being killed almost daily. She was within the firing zone when
the Germans first began their use of poisonous gases, and it was only
because she had a full load of wounded in her car that she moved to the
rear before the deadly fumes reached her.

All the risks of death and injury, however, would seem to be less of
an ordeal to a woman of sensitive nerves than the sights she must
constantly witness. The bodies of dead and wounded have been turned
black, green and yellow, so that they become in many instances a
caricature of humanity.

Then so furious is the fighting and so difficult the work of attending
to the wounded that the dead have often been left unburied for days.
The wounded are often terribly mangled and sometimes left to lie in the
dirt for hours or even days before the ambulances can find them. Before
they can be relieved at all their clothes and boots may have to be cut
from them, and in this process very often large masses of flesh come
away with the garments. These and other services are rendered by the
women ambulance workers.

The exquisite Miss Gladys Nelson has been doing her share in this
terrible work, and, according to last accounts, doing it very
creditably. Will she come through the ordeal a stronger and nobler
character or will she break down under it?

One of the bravest English nurses is Miss Muriel Thompson, of the First
Aid Yeomanry Corps. She belongs to a well-known English family. She is
a pretty girl of robust physique. She has been right up to the trenches
in one of the worst centres of carnage in the whole field of war. Many
badly wounded Belgians, who had no hope of medical attention from
their own forces, were carried by Miss Thompson from the firing line.
King Albert of Belgium presented to her on the battlefield a medal for
bravery.

The beautiful Marchioness of Drogheda, a young matron of the highest
aristocracy, is nursing the wounded in a houseboat on the Yser River,
in Belgium, where some of the most terrible fighting of the whole
war has occurred. This is the spot where the Germans put forth their
greatest force in the West last October to break down the allied lines
and reach the English Channel.

The Germans in their advance either killed the Belgian inhabitants or
at least drove them out and destroyed their homes. The allies in their
anxiety to stop the Germans flooded the country and destroyed hundreds
more Belgian homes. The world has never seen a more pitiful and
death-strewn waste than this once very populous and prosperous region.

The Marchioness of Drogheda and some other English women are laboring
among the wounded and starving on the Yser, within sound of the guns to
relieve some little part of the unspeakable misery.

Two of the most noted beauties of the British aristocracy are in
training to act as war nurses. One of them is Lady Diana Manners,
daughter of the Duke of Rutland and sister of the former Lady Marjorie
Manners, whose heart affairs have been of so much interest to the world.

Lady Diana is one of the most charming, dainty and sprightly girls in
the liveliest set of fashionable society. To think of such a girl amid
the blood, dirt and horrors of trench warfare gives one the greatest
shock of all. It has not yet been decided where Lady Diana will take up
her duties in the war area, but her friends say that her spirit is so
great that she will go to the most dangerous places that any woman has
yet ventured to.

Another beautiful girl of equal social prominence who has been training
as a war nurse is Miss Monica Grenfell, daughter of Lord Desborough,
one of the most noted sportsmen in England.

In the earlier stages of the war considerable adverse comment was
excited by the numbers of society women who forced themselves through
their influence with high officials into the fighting area, where they
were not fitted to be of help and were often a serious hindrance.

This evil has now been nearly eliminated. With a growing sense of the
awful seriousness of the war the most frivolous of society women have
become subdued. Under the direction of such masterful men as General
Kitchener and General Joffre the army officers and other officials have
refused to allow any women, however highly connected, who were actuated
merely by curiosity, to proceed to the front.

Only women qualified to nurse and belonging to a recognized war nursing
organization are now allowed to go near the fighting area.

At one time criticism was excited by the sight of Lady Dorothy
Fielding, the twenty-year-old daughter of the Earl of Denbigh, standing
among a group of admiring French and Belgian officers at the front. It
was assumed that a girl of such an age and such training could only be
a hindrance among the fighting men, and it was even hinted that she was
addicted to flirting.

Whatever she may have been at first, the young Lady Dorothy has now
changed all opinions of her and become a real heroine. With training
and experience now lasting for months she has become a most valuable
as well as courageous nurse in rescuing and caring for the wounded.
Naturally a strong girl and accustomed to athletic sports, she has
shown herself peculiarly fitted for this kind of work.

Many ladies of rank interested in the wounded have lately shown their
good sense by not trying to go to the fighting area. The handsome and
skittish Duchess of Westminster, who excited some attention at first by
bustling around among the soldiers in France has now gone to Serbia,
where there is the greatest need of Good Samaritans. The hospital
founded by her at Le Touquet, near Paris, has done good work.

The condition of Serbia is such that any women who ventures there must
see the extremes of human misery. The whole country has been turned
into a charnel house by the invading Austrians, followed by the still
more terrible typhus fever. Men, women and children are dying of
disease without being able to find a bed to lie on or a roof to cover
them.

One report stated that young Lady Paget had died while nursing typhus
patients in Serbia. Her mother is the well-known American Lady Paget,
wife of General Sir Arthur Paget, and the daughter is married to a
distant cousin, named Sir Richard Paget, British Minister to Serbia.
Later news came that young Lady Paget had not died of the fever, but
she is passing through scenes of horror that have not been known in
Europe for three centuries.


IV--STORY OF A NEW YORK MOTHER WHO SOUGHT HER SON IN THE TRENCHES

Paul Planet was sailing away from New York and from the mother he
adored to fight under the colors of France.

Other women--mothers, wives, sisters, sweethearts--pressed forward.
They also gazed tearfully after the slowly receding steamer.

The girlish figure with the great brown eyes and firm, resolute mouth,
stood motionless.

"Paul," she murmured. "He is my only child--my boy!"

Weeks passed--months.

Paul Planet's regiment was at the front. He had learned what it
means to look death in the face, to live in the trenches, to see the
horrors and devastation of war. He had fought and fought bravely, and
experienced no regrets save one--that he must be separated from his
mother.

"We have always been more like chums than mother and son," he confided
to his comrades. "Since my earliest recollection until now we have
never been separated."

But when he drew forth a small picture from over his heart and said
it was a likeness of the mother for whose loneliness he sighed, his
friends ridiculed his statement.

"Your sweetheart," they said, "or perhaps your sister. But never, never
ask us to believe that the likeness is of your mother."

"She is always young--always beautiful--to me she will never grow old,"
declared the young soldier. But after that he did not show the picture
again.

In far away New York the fair young mother of so stalwart a son
learned, as months rolled by, what it means to watch and wait, to
tremble at the sound of the postman's ring lest it be the harbinger
of ill news; to live, day by day, in a state of suspense and agony
bordering upon despair, and to envy every mother she saw whose son
walked by her side.

Then she, too, sailed for France.

"I must find my boy," she told those who sought to dissuade her from
undertaking the trip.

For nearly a year had passed and no word had been received from Paul
Planet. His name had not appeared in the lists of dead and missing, yet
of his whereabouts his mother could learn nothing.

She applied to the officials at the Army Headquarters in Paris for
information or assistance in locating her son. Her efforts were
fruitless. Passports she received to certain sections of the country
where the family name was known and where she had relatives or friends
to visit or business to transact, but no permission was accorded her to
leave the train at any intermediate point nor to visit a military camp.

Day after day Mme. Planet planned and schemed how she might find her
boy. She made journey after journey in the vain hope that chance might
bring her near him. Her aged mother now accompanied her.

"It will be a miracle if you ever find him," declared the elder woman
as they looked forth upon miles of devastated country through which
long lines of trenches intersected. Everywhere madame's inquiry met
with the same discouraging reply. Paul Planet, the young soldier in the
automobile service, might be in one of any number of places. Even if
located it would be impossible for madame to visit him.

The train in which madame was travelling drew up at a siding near the
ruins of what had once been a small village. Several troop trains sped
by. Slowly the sidetracked train pulled forward toward the main tracks
again. Madame, restless and anxious, crossed the compartment and peered
from the window. The next instant a startled exclamation escaped her
lips.

"What is it?" asked her mother.

With frantic haste the younger woman turned and commenced to collect
their travelling bags.

"I have found Paul," she whispered. "We must leave the train at the
next station."

Now, all that day Paul Planet, for some strange psychological reason
which he could not have explained, had felt conscious of his mother's
nearness. Yet she was in New York, he reasoned and fear smote his heart
lest sickness or accident had befallen her.

"Rest--for two hours."

Down along the marching line of soldiers the order was repeated. Planet
heard it and fell out with alacrity. He heard himself detailed for
temporary duty with a corporal's guard to unload automobile trucks. A
troop train rushed by and a waiting passenger train pulled slowly out
from a siding.

Planet glanced up. From the window of the latter train a face looked
forth--a hand waved. Was he dreaming? Surely that was his mother's
face he had seen! He dashed forward. The face was very distinct now.
Impulsively he laid his finger across his lips as his mother had been
wont to do when, as a child, she had desired him to remain silent. If
the face at the window was that of his mother they must be discreet or
she would never be permitted to join him.

"My mother was on that train," he confided to the soldier beside him.
The man laughed.

"Impossible," he exclaimed. "You have seen a vision."

But Paul Planet had not seen a vision. Two miles further on, when the
train had come to a halt at the little village station, Mme. Planet
almost pulled her protesting mother of seventy down the steps. The
guards also protested.

"Your passports, madame? Where are your passports?" they asked.

"My passports?" she repeated. "Oh, monsieur, I am so excited I do not
know. There are passports there--papers--anything you want--in that
bag."

Madame was so charming--the name of Planet was so well known--that the
bag remained at the station, unopened, and the clever French-American
mother hurried off in search of her supposed friends.

She found them down along the railroad. A little squad of uniformed men
unloading automobile trucks.

"Vive la France!" she cried. "Vive la France!" and all the while her
brown eyes were gazing hungrily, eagerly into the equally brown orbs of
her son. It would not do to single him out from the others. To do so
might result in difficulties for him and for her.

The two hours' rest was lengthened to six. Still the detachment waited
by the roadside. Still madame and her mother waited.

Again the former's ready wit came to their aid. Madame was so
distressed! The friends she had expected to find in the village had
gone away. There was no place for herself and her mother to dine. Would
the soldiers be so kind--so generous----

The soldiers would. They hospitably provided a tent for madame and her
mother. It might be two days, the officers told them, before another
passenger train stopped at that station. Madame, overjoyed, resigned
herself to Providence and basked in the sunshine of her son's presence.
The ban of secrecy had been lifted now. Their relationship was made
known and pocket kodaks drafted into service as the troops were
breaking camp.

"I will have the pictures developed when I reach Paris," said madame
as she once more clasped her boy in her arms. "I have seen you again
and I am content. That two hours' respite by the roadside that resolved
itself into a two days' encampment was a special dispensation of
Providence."

"It was a miracle, mother," declared the son. "There have been miracles
all through this war. That you found me was one of them." Then he
kissed her and marched away.




AN AMERICAN WOMAN'S STORY OF THE "ANCONA" TRAGEDY

_Told by Dr. Cecile Greil, an American Physician_

  Dr. Cecile Greil was the only native-born American on the liner
  _Ancona_, which was shelled and sunk by an Austrian submarine. She
  tells this intensely graphic account of the terrible event in the
  _New York Times_. She precedes it with a description of the crowd
  of passengers, mostly poor Italian women and children, that had
  passage on the ship--the most pathetic gathering, it seemed to her
  as they came aboard the ship, that she had ever seen.


I--"WHEN THE TORPEDO STRUCK US"

The bell for luncheon rang at 11:30. As we sat at the table, still
without the Captain, we joked and laughed together, to hide our lack
of ease. We spoke of trivial things. We were through with lunch now;
the others were going out; I was rising from my seat, at the same time
drinking the remainder of my coffee. Then the thing came upon us that
we had all, strangely enough, felt coming, in our hearts.

A terrific vibration shook the ship. I was thrown back into my seat. I
knew that the ship must be stopping. I heard a running and scurrying
about the deck outside. Looking out, I saw, through the dining saloon
window, six or ten stewards in white whirling out of sight around an
angle.

"What could be wrong, Doctor?" I asked one of the ship's doctors in
French.

"Heaven only knows!" he answered, as he carefully adjusted his military
cape, and hurried out. The dining saloon was emptied in an instant;
everybody had bolted as if they were running to a fire.

It was evident that something had gone wrong with the ship, though,
by some queer process of mind, at that moment nobody thought of a
submarine. But hearing the next moment a sharp, quick crash, as of
lightning that had struck home close by, at the same instant I both
thought of the possibility of a submarine--and saw one!

The fog had lifted slightly. There, in full view framed in the window
with a curious, picture-like effect, lay a submarine with its deck out
of the water. It was long and flat, horribly longer and bigger than
the mental conception I had formed of what such a thing would be like.
There was a gun mounted in front, and another at back, and both had
their muzzles leveled directly at the _Ancona_.

The submarine stood out in clear, black outline against the white
background of mist. The fog seemed only to make it more distinct, as it
always does with objects near by. From a staff in the back broke a red
and white drapeau. Afterward I learned that this was the combination of
colors that made the Austrian flag. I was ignorant of it, then, though
I remembered the exact colors.

So far, I could find nothing tragic or terrible in the situation.
Possibly we would be in danger of considerable exposure in open boats,
before other ships, summoned by wireless, would pick us up. I did not
rush out as the others had done. I stood quite still, in order to calm
myself, to give myself time to think what would better be done. The
_Ancona_ had come to a stop. Of that I was certain. I also knew that
the ship was doomed.

But now there came another terrible crash, and another, and another,
in different parts of the ship, followed by explosions and the sound
of débris falling into the water and on deck. Well, they were merely
destroying the wireless. Still there was no fear of death.

But now I was aware of a terrible shrieking. Everybody was in a
frightened panic.


II--"THE HORROR OF WHAT I SAW"

Well, as for myself--to get excited wouldn't help. I went to my cabin
as calmly as I could, determined to save what I could of my valuables.
I put them in my lifebelt. I took a receipt for 20,000 lire, which
I had left with the purser. I went toward the bow of the ship. I
descended the staircase to the second cabin, on the way to the purser's
office. A large part of the staircase had been shot away--and the
horror of what I saw at the bottom of it made me instantly forget what
I was going for. There lay three or four women, four or five children,
and several men. Some of them were already dead, all, at least, badly
wounded. I made sure two of the children were dead. The purser sprawled
limply across his desk, inert, like a sack of meal that has been flung
down and stays where it lies. He had been shot in the head. The blood
was running bright like red paint, freshly spilt, down his back, and
his hair was matted with it.

The first series of shots had wrecked this part of the ship, breaking
through and carrying away whole sections of the framework. I tried
to get back up the stairs. But in the slight interval of time I had
consumed, enough additional shells had been discharged to finish the
wreck of the staircase.

I saw that this was not what the nations call, ironically enough,
"legitimate warfare," but wholesale and indiscriminate massacre.
Seeing my exit that way cut off, I started through the second cabin
to go up the central stairway. The sight that I ran into there was
indescribable. All the passengers from the third cabin had rushed up
into the second. They had altogether lost their wits. The only thing
that was left them was the animal instinct for self-preservation in its
most disastrous and most idiotic form. Men, women, and children were
burrowing headforemost under chairs and benches and tables. I saw one
man, his face pressed close against the floor sidewise, heaving a chair
up in the air with his back, in an effort to efface himself.

All the while the detonations, like continuous thunder and lightning,
increased the panic. Women were on their knees in mental agony, each
supplicating the particular saint of the part of the country from
which she came to save her from death. I pushed and shoved them by the
shoulders. I took them by the legs and arms and clothes, and urged
them, in Italian, to get up, to put on lifebelts, to get off the ship.
I told them that, at least, they would find no security from shells
under chairs and tables.

I found a poor old woman at the foot of the stairs, huddled in prayer.
Her thin, gray hair straggled loose over her shoulder. I recognized her
as a woman I had got acquainted with in my search for a fellow-citizen
to join me in the first cabin. She was 65 years old, she had told me.
She had seen two sons off to the war, and was now going to a third who
had emigrated to America and lived in Pennsylvania. It was the first
time she had ever crossed the ocean. She was sick of the thought of
war. In the New World she would find peace and comfort for her old age,
with her "Bambino," as she still called the grown-up man who was her
son. So when I saw her lying there I was possessed of but one idea--to
get her off alive. I told her to come with me, that I would protect
her. She acquiesced, but her fright was so great that she hung limp as
if she had no spine while I half dragged her to the first cabin deck.

A boat was being lowered. It had been swung out on the davits. It
already seethed full of people. And more men and women and children
were fighting, in a promiscuous, shrieking mass, to get into it as it
swung out and down. The men, with their superior strength, were, of
course, getting the best of the struggle. Age or sex had no weight. It
was brute strength that prevailed.

At the sight before her the old woman grew frantic with unexpected
strength. She suddenly jerked loose from me, and before I could prevent
her, ran with all the agility of fear and jumped overboard. Others
flung their bodies pell-mell on the heads of those already in it. Some,
in their frenzy, missed the mark at which they aimed themselves and
fell into the sea. To make the horror complete, the boat now stuck at
one end, tilted downward, and spilled all its occupants into the sea,
ninety or a hundred at once. They seized each other. Some swam. Others
floundered and sank almost immediately, dragging each other down. Some
drowned themselves even with lifebelts on, not knowing how to hold
their heads out of the water.

I tried to speak with the passengers still on deck. It was useless.
Everybody was talking in his own particular dialect. Then I realized
the predicament I myself was in--an utter foreigner, whom they would
sacrifice in an instant for one of their own nationality. Perhaps if
only I had some of my jewelry I might be able to bribe my way to safety
in some such crisis.


III--"THE DEAD WERE LYING ON DECK"

I made my way back to my cabin again. There were people dead and dying
on the deck. I saw one man who had started to run up the gangway to
the officer's deck come plunging down again. He had been struck in the
back of the head. Somehow or other, I just felt that my time had not
yet come. This conviction enabled me to keep my wits about me.

In my cabin I flung up the top of my steamer trunk. As I was searching
for my valuables my chambermaid appeared in the doorway; half a dozen
times I had met her rushing frantically and aimlessly up and down.

"Oh, madame, madame--we shall all be killed, we're all going to get
killed!"

"Maria," I advised as quietly and soothingly as I could, still stooping
over my trunk; "don't be so mad, get a lifebelt on, and get up out of
here."

Before she could speak again she was a dead woman. A shot carried away
the port-hole and sheared off the top of her head. It finished its
course by exploding at the other side of the ship. If I had not been
stooping over at the time I would not have lived to write this story.

I snatched up my little jewel-basket with a few favorite trinkets
in it. I put on my cap and sweater. When I got up on deck I saw the
submarine carefully circumnavigating its victims and deliberately
shooting toward us at all angles. I ran along the deck. The sea was
full of deck rails, parts of doors, and other wreckage, and dotted with
human beings, some dead, others alive, and screaming for help. There
was another boat in front that tilted and dumped out its frantic load
into the sea. Peering over the side of the ship, I saw a boat that had
already been lowered to the water's edge. In it I recognized the two
ship's doctors, and two of the seamen. There was also an officer in the
boat, Carlo Lamberti, the chief engineer. He sat at the helm. I called
out to them to take me in.

"Jump!" they shouted back.

I threw my basket down. I had a good twenty-foot drop. I have always
been a good swimmer. Furthermore, I saw that if I jumped into the boat,
crowded with people, sails, water-barrels, and pails for bailing, I
might cause it to capsize. So I told them to push the boat away and
then they could pick me up out of the water.

I escaped with a ducking.

An immigrant girl who followed me flung herself down wildly and broke
both her legs on the side of the ship.

We were powerless to save any more. The ship might at any moment
receive the final torpedo from the submarine. The sailors rowed madly
to get out of danger.

Then the torpedo was discharged. It whizzed across the ship, drawing
a tail behind it like a comet. It plunged beneath the _Ancona_ as
if guided by a diabolical intelligence of its own. There followed
a terrific explosion. Huge jets of thick black smoke shot up, with
showers of débris. Our boat rocked and swayed in the roughened
water. The _Ancona_ lurched to the left, righted herself, shivered
a moment--then her bow shot high in the air like a struggling,
death-stricken animal. She went under, drawing a huge, funnel-like
vortex after her.

The Captain and some officers were the last to drop astern, in a small
boat. Passengers were still to be seen, clinging forward, like ants on
driftwood, as the ship was drawn down. There were many people wounded,
so that they could not get off unaided. They were left to die.

The sea now looked absolutely empty, swept smooth. The ship had drawn
everything down with it. The fog undulating upward, the submarine was
seen lying in full view, as if in quiet Teutonic contemplation of what
it had done. Then it moved off, and was soon merged into the waste of
sea and fog. We felt a great relief when it had departed.


IV--SURVIVORS DRIFTING ON THE OCEAN

All that afternoon our six surviving boats drifted within sight of each
other. When darkness fell large yellow lanterns were lit, and from time
to time Bengal lights flared and fell. It looked like a regatta held on
the River Styx, in Hell. The sailors had exhausted themselves rowing,
so the improvised sails were set. The boat-loads of survivors had run
the gamut of every emotion. They were now mere stocks of insensibility,
numb, dumb, and inert.

At six in the afternoon a boat just behind us began sending us signals
of distress. The men had taken off their shirts and were waving them
to us on oars. Our sailors objected to turning back, saying that both
boats would be sunk if we tried to relieve them. But Carlo Lamberti,
the chief engineer, with a quiet look in his blue eyes, with a rather
careless, engaging smile, which was habitual to him all the time,
presented his revolver--and we went back to see what was wrong.

We found that the boat had been struck by a shell and was leaking
badly. True enough, most of the people in it tried to make an immediate
stampede into our boat. But again Lamberti presented his eloquent
pistol and his quiet smile, and with order and precision we took aboard
the wounded, the women, and children. Then the leaky craft was tied
to our stern and the men left were easily able to keep it afloat by
bailing.

"We'll save you, or go down with you!" Lamberti reassured them. This
chief engineer was the only man who showed signal bravery.

One of the first of the wounded rescued from the leaky boat was my
former companion, the Marquis Serra Cassano. He did not wish to join
in the incipient stampede. With four toes of his foot shot away, he
rose limpingly to assist the other wounded into our boat first, before
he himself came in. Then with an air of pathetic aristocracy he seated
himself by me, and wanted to know if any one had a cigaret to spare. We
had four cigarets on the boat. The men took turns puffing them.

A frantic mother had dropped her baby in the water. I jumped out and
rescued it. Later on, she got separated from it, and I had it in my
charge for several days--but that is not in the present story.

We kept close watch on each other's boats till nightfall. As the other
five would appear and disappear, we would be alternately cheered and
frightened.

It must have been nearly midnight when one of our sailors cried out
that he saw a ship's light. But for a long while nothing appeared
but thin threads of light that filtered through the fog. After some
discussion as to whether it might not be an enemy craft, we approached
the direction of the light, till it burst on us in a powerful,
searching blaze. And we discerned the other boats converging toward it,
mere moving yellow splurges in the gloom.

The ship that was rescuing us was a French mine layer, the _Pluton_. It
was hellish-looking, as it beetled over us, but none the less it looked
like heaven, too!

And now our boat-loads of survivors were close together, and suddenly
everybody grew voluble and chatty. We shouted across the water to each
other. I even heard a voice singing. We were saved! We were saved!




THE STRATEGY OF SISTER MADELEINE

_The Story of a French Captain's Escape from the Germans_

_Told by himself, and translated by G. Frederic Lees_

  Few men who have succeeded in slipping through the clutching
  fingers of the Mailed Fist have such a moving record of adventure
  to their credit as Captain X----, who here relates his remarkable
  experiences. There is the true Stevensonian flavor in some of
  the episodes narrated; and at the same time the story has real
  historical value, since it opens with a graphic account of the
  Battle of Charleroi, which has not yet been described by the French
  Staff, or by any of the unofficial historians of the war. The
  officer's name is suppressed in deference to his own request when
  he related his experiences in the _Wide World Magazine_.


I--MY EXPERIENCES AT THE BATTLE OF CHARLEROI

In relating my adventures, extending over more than fifteen months,
I cannot do better than begin with the starting-point of the whole
affair--the Battle of Charleroi. To describe the events which grouped
themselves around August 22nd, 23rd, 24th, and 25th, 1914, seems like
telling old news, but, as a matter of fact, the gigantic struggle named
after the Belgian town of ironworks and mines has yet to be recorded.
The French Staff has published nothing, unofficial historians--eager
to be the first to place their researches before the public--have only
given general and often erroneous descriptions of the advance of Von
Kluck, Von Buelow, and Von Hausen against Sir John French's forces on
the Condé-Mons-Binche line and the Fifth French Army holding the line
of the Sambre, and the newspaper accounts are sometimes contradictory.

I am not going to weary you with military technicalities; we will leave
questions of strategy and tactics alone and direct our attention to the
battlefield as seen from two points of view: that of myself, an officer
in the French Army, and that of an inhabitant of Charleroi, with whom
I was later thrown into contact, and by whose observations, made from
the roof of his house, I was fortunate in benefiting.

Picture to yourself the sinuous Sambre, flowing in its deep bed
through the densely-populated suburbs of Charleroi and the southern
end of this formerly fortified town. The town itself, imprisoned by
its walls, is but a small place of some thirty thousand inhabitants,
but the population is swelled to five hundred thousand by the
contiguous suburbs of Montigny, Couillet, Marcinelle, Gilly, Châtelet,
Marchiennes, Roux, Jumet, Gosselies, and others which cluster around
the ancient nucleus and stretch principally northwards. To fight
a battle on such a ground as this was impossible, so the German
forces, descending from the north and the east in unknown hundreds of
thousands, determined to make for the open-wooded country which lies
beyond the southern suburbs of the town. Two tremendous obstacles
stood in their way--the closely-packed houses of the suburbs and the
strongly-held river. The inhabitants soon learnt to their cost how
the first of these was to be overcome. Suddenly, shortly after the
appearance of the advance-guard of the German army, violent explosions
were heard, accompanied by the pop! pop! pop! of machine-guns and the
discharge of musketry. The Huns were blasting a broad way through the
suburbs, setting fire to the houses, and--under pretense that they
were being fired upon by civilians--shooting the people down in their
houses and in the streets. Right through the quarters of Gosselies and
Jumet they penetrated; then branched off to the right and left, one
band of incendiaries reaching the river through Marchiennes, the other
cutting its way through the town and reaching the bridge which connects
Montigny and Couillet. These two points were where the enemy first
succeeded in crossing the Sambre. Later, when we had begun our retreat
southwards, owing to pressure from Von Hausen's army massed in the
Northern Ardennes, they crossed at two other places, east of Charleroi.
Thus, on Sunday, August 23rd, the preliminaries of the great battle
were carried out.

South of the river the ground rises gently until it reaches the wooded
heights in the neighbourhood of Beaumont, Thuillies, Nalinnes, and
Somzée. I was stationed at the first of these places--a little village
on high ground, with a commanding view of the green countryside. Who
would have thought, but for the deafening roar of cannon, the incessant
rattle of the machine-guns, the occasional whir of an aeroplane
overhead, and the puffs and rings of white smoke high in air, that we
were looking on a battlefield? How empty it was! We could see from the
flashes of the carefully-hidden guns whence death was springing; but in
the early stages of the struggle only small bodies of the enemy, whose
greenish-grey uniforms mingled well with the verdure, were from time
to time visible. At night, however, it was different. The red glare of
burning villages and farms, set on fire by shells, lit up the sky and
provided a terrifying spectacle, night after night, for the anxious
watchers of Charleroi.


II--"WE MOWED THEM DOWN WITH MACHINE GUNS"

As the Germans advanced and the battle raged from morning to night,
it became more and more evident that we were hopelessly outnumbered.
Possessing an advantage, however, in being on high ground, it was clear
that we could hold out for a considerable length of time and make the
enemy pay dearly for every yard of ground we had to give away. When
once the greenish-grey uniforms began to appear in any considerable
number, they came on in solid masses, which we mowed down, time after
time, by rifle and machine-gun fire and by showers of shrapnel from our
"75's." But others quickly filled their places, and thus the human tide
advanced, until at last the order had to be given for the retreat. This
was on August 25th, by which date, after the enemy had been obliged to
suspend operations for twenty-four hours to collect the wounded, they
had lost over forty thousand men.

_Ah! les gredins!_ how well they deserved their fate for the shooting
down of peaceful citizens in Charleroi and the unspeakable crimes
committed in the communes on the wooded heights of Loverval, Acoz,
Montigny-le-Tilleul, and Somzée! With what satisfaction our small
detachments, hidden in the woods, let the German scouts pass on in
order to open fire at close quarters on the masses of troops which
followed! They paid, then, for the outrages perpetrated by the Uhlans.
You ask for an instance. Here is one which was related to me by my
friend of Charleroi--he who viewed the battle from his house-top, and
afterwards explored the battlefield to come face to face with this
grim picture. A typical instance of Teutonic cruelty, I give it in his
own words: "A little way out of the village of Somzée was a small farm
inhabited by a young household, including three small children. Honest,
courageous, and economical folk, they had toiled season after season
to pay by annual instalments for their property, which they had agreed
to purchase some eight years ago. The last payment had just been made;
the children were growing up; the little family was happy. But the
German monsters came. In a few minutes this hardly-earned happiness was
shattered. The Boches seized everything--the few cows, the dearly-loved
horse. They set fire to the farm, shot the farmer, and drove before
them, into the distance, the poor widow with her four weeping and
terrified children. What a sinister picture it makes! It was at the
close of a splendid August day. The little isolated farm is burning.
A few yards from the door the dead man is lying on his back. On the
side of the hill which descends to the main road are the silhouettes of
the Uhlans disappearing in the gathering darkness of night. Tongues of
flame on the horizon mark places where similar dramas had been enacted."

"Now, then, boys, let them have it hot. Pick off the gunners one by
one. Marcel, Gustave, François, do you keep an eye on the officers.
_Ah, les gredins!_ we'll teach them!"

It was the day after the battle of Charleroi, and whilst our troops
were retiring in good order, my men and I, after the fashion of many
other small detachments, were holding a German battery in check. So
near were we to the enemy that we could hear the harsh, guttural
commands of the artillery officers--so different from the tone of
_camaraderie_ we adopt towards our men in the truly democratic army of
France--and could see them, though indistinctly, urging on their men
to the attack. From our trenches on a wooded knoll on the outskirts
of Beaumont, we kept up a steady fire on those who were serving the
guns, around which the Boches, falling like flies, quickly began to
accumulate in heaps. Fresh men incessantly replaced those who had
fallen, who at last lay in such numbers that the officers, in order
to make room for the gunners, had the dead dragged away to the rear
by the feet. Company after company of men fell in this way until the
German officers, who had either been shot or had decided to withdraw,
could be heard no more. A lull occurred. Bringing my glasses to bear on
the battery, I could see no sign of life save the convulsive movements
of a few of the prostrate men around the guns.

"It looks as though they had had enough," said I, to my friend Marcel,
a private who comes from the same place as myself--Loctudy, in
Brittany. "I wonder if we could capture those guns?"

Before he had time to answer a hurricane of bullets came from a hidden
machine-gun, and one of them found its billet. My poor friend, shot
through the head, fell into my arms. We laid him gently down, thinking
of the sad news that would have to be broken to a sorrowing mother at
home, and then, anger mingling with regret in our hearts, once more
directed our attention to the invisible enemy, in whose direction we
hastened to send our compliments in the form of a stream of _prunes_.
Overhead we could hear the humming of one of our aeroplanes, and
through an opening in the tree-tops momentarily caught sight of it as
it moved over the German lines, reconnoitering. Rings of smoke from
bursting shrapnel broke far beneath it. Its mission over, it moved
swiftly back to our lines, and within ten minutes Marcel and many
other brave fellows were avenged. Our "75's" got the range of the
battery in front of us with marvellous exactitude, and for five minutes
poured upon it such a rain of shells as to make it seem impossible
that anything could live within a distance of a hundred yards. The
dead around the guns were scattered like chaff in a high wind. A great
silence followed that series of violent explosions. For five minutes,
in accordance with orders, the men were busy cutting steps with their
entrenching tools in our trench, so as to spring out of it quickly and
proceed to capture the guns. Caution prompted another five minutes'
wait, during which there was not a sign of life before us.

"Now, then, _mes gars!_ time's up," I cried, as loud as prudence would
allow. "Fix bayonets! Out of the trench as nimbly as you can. Take
cover, when in the open, as much as possible. Are you ready? Forward,
for the sake of France!"


III--"DEAD ON THE FIELD OF HONOUR"

We advanced towards the guns at the _pas de gymnastique_ and reached
them without mishap. Some were too shattered by the recent bombardment
to be of any further use, but others were still intact, and these, as
it was difficult if not impossible for us to get them away in a retreat
over a hilly wooded country, we determined to destroy. Ordering some
of my men to do what was necessary, and as rapidly as possible, the
others and I kept a sharp look-out. The enemy gave not a sign of life.
The fuses having been attached to the breeches of the guns and lit,
we began to retire whither we had come, but had hardly gone more than
fifty yards, and heard the successive explosions of the guns blowing
up, when, on looking over my shoulder, I saw a body of Germans emerge
at a run from a coppice about two hundred yards to our right, and heard
them open fire upon us. At the same time I felt a sharp, burning pain
in my side; a curious sensation of intense weakness filled my being;
and, with a vision of men falling to the ground with extended arms, I,
too, bowed down, unconscious, to Mother Earth.

That night, as I afterwards learnt, I was posted as "dead on the field
of honour." After eleven hours of oblivion, I came to myself in a
German ambulance. My first impression on recovering consciousness was
that of hearing the gruff, peremptory voice of a German Herr Doktor at
my bedside; my second, when he had passed on to another sufferer, that
of seeing a sweet French face bending over me.

"Where am I?" I asked.

"Hush! the doctor says you must speak as little as possible," replied
the nurse, in a French which I at once detected to be that of an
educated person. "I will tell you all that you need know for the
present. You are in our little ambulance at Erquelinnes, on the
frontier between Belgium and France--a German ambulance. But fear
not"--this in a lower voice--"my country is France, and I am not
without influence, or I should not be here. Your wound, though serious,
will get well in time. Only you must be _sage_, and obey me. There,
now! _Cela suffit!_ Try to get a little more sleep; the more rest you
have the better."

It needed but the invitation, the sound of her soothing voice, like
that of a tender mother speaking to her child, and especially those
singularly calming words: "Fear not--my country is France," which
seemed to wrap me within the protective folds of the tricolour, to
send me back once more into that state of semi-unconsciousness which
appears to transport one to the borderline between life and death. Loss
of blood during those many hours while I had lain forgotten on the
battlefield had, indeed, brought me to so weak a condition that, as
my benefactress told me later, the doctor had hardly expected to pull
me through. My wound was one of those which have been encountered so
often in this war; it exhibited the curious vagaries of which bullets
are capable. The projectile entered my right side, travelled along a
downward, curved path, and, avoiding any of the vital organs, came out
at the other side. A millimetre to right or left, and it might have
either killed or paralyzed me. As it was, the injury and loss of blood
were serious, and could only be repaired by many weeks of immobility,
coupled with skilled medical aid (and I must do the Herr Doktor the
justice of recognizing that he was highly capable) and the devoted
attention of my nurse. Ah! kindly benefactress of the ambulance of
Erquelinnes, know, should you ever read my words, that I can never
thank you enough for all you did for me. To have shown my gratitude
too openly amidst the surroundings where your lot was cast--under what
circumstances I have often tried to imagine--would have betrayed you.
But, knowing how one French heart can understand another without the
passing of words, I doubt not that you have long since comprehended the
gratitude of the soldier of the Republic whom you befriended and saved.


IV--ON THE ARM OF SISTER MADELEINE

A month in bed brought me the period when I was declared out of danger,
and was allowed to sit up in a chair near a window overlooking a
little garden bright with hollyhocks and sunflowers. Then came the day
when, leaning on the arm of Sister Madeleine--the name under which,
she said, I was to know her--I took my first walk and descended into
that garden, to lie there for the best hours of the day on a _chaise
longue_, conversing with her, or, when she was occupied with other
wounded, reading and reflecting. It was Sister Madeleine who told
me of passing events. But, oh! how discreetly she broke the news of
the triumphant march of the German armies southward to Dinant and
westward to Maubeuge! It required no great psychological insight on
my part to detect where her sympathies lay. Her looks when, the wind
being favourable, the faint sound of cannon reached us, the tone of
her voice when France was named, her significant reticence on certain
occasions, told me much more than actual words. One of these occasions
stands out in my mind with particular prominence, owing to my having
read in her words a warning, and conceived for the first time the idea
of escape.

"The Herr Doktor is immensely pleased with the progress you are making,
Captain X----," said Sister Madeleine, rising from my side to pluck
some Michaelmas daisies from an adjoining border. "He says you may be
allowed soon to take a little gentle exercise in the garden, and do a
little gardening, too, if you are a flower-lover, as I doubt not. Are
you inclined that way?"

"I shall be delighted to turn my hand to weeding and planting," I
replied. "The garden indeed needs attention!"

"_N'est ce pas?_ Poor Jean, our gardener, now with the French colours,
would be heartbroken if only he could see the wilderness his little
earthly paradise has become. How grateful he will be to you when he
returns--if he ever should return after this dreadful war--and finds
that someone has been tending his beloved chrysanthemums and dahlias.
When the mobilization order reached him he was in the midst of potting
slips of geranium in the tool and potting shed yonder"--motioning to a
little wooden construction at the end of the garden--"and everything
there is just as he left it. A heap of withered slips lies side by
side with rows of empty flower-pots, whilst in a corner I saw his
working-clothes, which he hastily changed before he came to the house
to wish us good-bye and passed into the unknown."

"I must try to prove myself to be a worthy successor to the brave
fellow," I said. "Don't you think, Sister Madeleine, that in one
respect--my unkempt appearance--I shall not make a bad substitute?"

Walking back to me with her bouquet, she gave me a critical look and
laughed. Certainly, no one at home would have recognized me as I now
was, with my long beard and moustache and uncut hair. All at once her
face became serious, and, without replying to my question, she said:--

"There is no reason why you should not start to-morrow. But don't do
too much to begin with. Though I should like to have you here much
longer, it would grieve me if that were the result of a relapse.
You must get back your strength by degrees. And I fear you will
need every ounce of it in the future. No; do rather too little than
too much. I have no wish to hear that the Kommandatur at Charleroi,
who, I understand, is showing great severity just now towards French
prisoners, should decide that you have recovered sufficiently to be
included in the next batch to be sent into Germany."

And with these significant words Sister Madeleine left me, to carry her
flowers to the bedsides of her other patients, and, possibly, to allow
me to reflect.

Was it not clear that, indirectly, she had indicated a means of escape?
A feeling of quasi-loyalty towards those who had enabled her to nurse
one of her countrymen back to health and strength prevented her from
bluntly saying: "There is a tool-shed, in which you will find a suit of
old clothes; disguise yourself in them and flee." But her meaning was
plain. The key to freedom had been placed in my hands, and it was for
me to use it.


V--"I PLAN TO ESCAPE DISGUISED AS THE GARDENER"

I began pottering about the hollyhocks and sunflowers and dahlias the
very next morning, taking care to alternate my spells of gardening with
fairly lengthy rests, on the principle laid down by Sister Madeleine.
Not that they were altogether unnecessary in my still weak state.
However, my strength returned with remarkable rapidity, after the first
week of this light work, and every additional day found me more fit
to carry out my plan, the details of which I had ample opportunity of
working out. The garden was surrounded by a high wall of irregular
construction, thus affording a foothold to a skilful climber, whose
task could be made still easier if he chose--as I had determined to
do--that portion of the enclosure which was masked by the tool-shed,
between the back of which and the wall was a space of about a foot and
a half, providing an additional support for one's body. My resemblance
to Jean, the gardener, had, by the by, become more and more perfect,
thanks to work with spade and hoe, and perhaps, at times, owing to
rather too close contact with the soil. That it would be perfection
itself when I had donned his garb, at the close of an afternoon's work
just before turning-in time, I felt convinced.

There was another thing of which I was certain: that Sister Madeleine
instinctively knew the day and hour I had fixed for my flight. For she
was so unusually silent on that day in the last week of October, when,
according to my calculations, there would be no moon until late in
the night, she was so serious in her mien, and she left me with such
suddenness after advising me to come in, "now that the sun had set and
the evenings were getting chilly," that I felt sure she comprehended.

"Thank you, Sister Madeleine," I replied; and I could not refrain from
adding, in the hope that she would grasp my double meaning: "You have
_always_ given me such good advice. I shall never forget your kindness.
But before coming in I must put away my tools."

Without daring to look her in the face, I turned down the path in the
direction of the tool-shed. Five minutes later I left it, dressed in
the gardener's earth-stained clothes, passed like a shadow to the rear
of the building, and was over the wall in a trice.

I found myself in a field, and having not the slightest idea regarding
the geography of Erquelinnes, went straight ahead at full speed. A
quarter of an hour's steeplechasing across ditches and other natural
obstacles brought me to a high road, and confronted me with the dilemma
as to which way to turn. Without losing a moment's time, for I pictured
the hue and cry my disappearance would soon be causing, I made off to
the left. _Fausse route!_ In five minutes I came within sight of the
lights of the first house of a village, undoubtedly Erquelinnes itself.
With a vague idea at the back of my head of gaining the Franco-Belgian
frontier, and--avoiding all small places, where curiosity is most
rife--reaching Maubeuge, where I might find an asylum among my own
people until an opportunity presented itself of getting back to the
French lines, I struck off to the right, once more across open country.
The dark cloak of night had now fallen, making my progress necessarily
slow. On and on I crept in the darkness. How long I continued I
cannot say, but it must have been for several hours, for a great
weariness suddenly came over me and impelled me to seek sleep. What was
apparently a small wood lay in my path at that moment. Groping my way
from bole to bole, I divined, rather than saw, a dry and sheltered spot
under the trees, and, throwing myself down, quickly fell asleep, amidst
the calling of the night-jars.


VII--"HANDS UP--OR I SHOOT"

I cannot tell you how long I slumbered--probably until two or three
o'clock in the morning. But I was awakened by the sound of the snapping
of dry twigs and muffled voices. I sprang to my feet and listened.
Nearer and nearer came the stealthy footsteps. I retired as cautiously
as I could; but though I trod ever so lightly, it was impossible to
avoid the crackling of dead wood, which seemed to my hypersensitive
ears like so many pistol-shots. Even the thumping of my heart appeared
audible. One curious thing, however, I noticed: whenever, after a noisy
retreat, I stopped to listen, there was a corresponding stoppage and a
long silence on the part of my pursuers. But, thought I, was it at all
certain they _were_ in pursuit? Would they not, in that case, have come
on with a rush? "Suppose I crouch down and run the risk of them passing
without seeing me?" I thought. Whilst I was reflecting; with my back
to what was apparently a fairly large tree, those who were advancing,
emboldened by the silence which had intervened, came on with hastened
steps, and got so near that I could hear their heavy breathing. I
stepped quickly behind my tree, but too late to serve my purpose, for
the next moment a stern voice rapped out an oath almost in my ear and
a flash of light from an electric torch struck me full in the face.

"Hands up, or I shoot!" said the voice. "Who are you?"

"A Frenchman," I replied, obeying the command and deciding, on the
spur of the moment, that one who spoke to me in my native tongue could
hardly be an enemy. "And in need of help."

"Good thing you're not a _Pruscot_, mate, or you'd have been a goner.
In need of help, are you? So are we. Aren't we, _mes vieuz_?"

This last remark was addressed to the speaker's two companions, whose
indistinct forms I could now make out.

"Very well," continued the speaker, slipping the revolver with which
he had covered me into his pocket, "I take it to be a bargain. One good
service deserves another. You help us with some of these parcels, and
we'll help _you_. I'm not going to ask you too many questions, and we
don't expect you to be over inquisitive about _our_ business. _C'est
compris?_ But if we're to get there and back before light we must be
off. Come on!"

Taking two of the heavy packages which they were transporting, I
followed them. In a flash, I saw that I had fallen in with a party
of smugglers, who still continued to ply their calling in the
neighbourhood of Erquelinnes and other villages on the frontier between
Belgium and France. Men of nondescript nationality, though hating the
Teuton with all the ardour of a Frenchman or a Belgian, and ready, if
a favourable opportunity offered, to rid the world of every Boche who
fell into their power, they made it their business to be on friendly
terms with the Prussian officers who were in authority on the frontier.
Many favours, in the early months of the war, could they obtain from
them, in return for a discreetly-offered gift, such as a box of cigars,
or a pound or two of tobacco. When taking any important consignment
of goods to and fro between their dépôts on the road from Maubeuge to
Charleroi, they had, of course, to resort to the traditional methods of
their calling; and it was whilst on one of these nocturnal expeditions
that I had encountered them.


VIII--THE FORGED PAPERS--TO SAFETY

They were rough individuals, but loyal to their word. Feeling that
I could not be in safer company, I threw in my lot with theirs for
nearly a fortnight, hiding by day in the cottage of their leader, on
the outskirts of a village "somewhere in France," but not far from
Erquelinnes, and assisting them at night in carrying their goods along
the little-known paths which intersect the Franco-Belgian frontier.
Bit by bit I told mine host my tale. He was touched as much as you
could expect a hardened smuggler to be, swore eternal friendship over
an excellent bottle of wine, and promised that on the very next day he
would bring me a surprise.

He was as good as his word. Out of his pocket he drew a paper--a
duly-signed and stamped pass, obtained from the Prussian officer at the
frontier village of ----, authorizing the bearer to cross into Belgium
without let or hindrance. He did more than this: he gave me the name
and address of a confederate at Charleroi, who would furnish me with
the means of effecting my escape _viâ_ Holland.

I crossed the frontier, wheeling a barrow belonging to a friendly
peasant, who went daily to a bit of land he possessed on Belgian
territory.

My twenty-mile walk to Charleroi, and a stay of a week in that city,
were uneventful. On leaving, my smuggler's friend gave me a useful
introduction to a person in Brussels, whence, with a little borrowed
money in my pocket, I set off, towards the end of November. The train
was still running the four miles between Charleroi and Gosselies.
The thirteen miles to Nivelles I covered on foot; the eighteen miles
past Waterloo and over ground every yard of which recalled memories
of Napoleon and the closing scenes of the Hundred Days I traversed by
train again.

The long sojourn which I was destined to make in Brussels was
uneventful compared to my late experiences. There I obtained papers
certifying that I was a Belgian commercial traveller, but discretion,
you will readily understand, forbids me going into details. Oh, no; I
did not put those forged papers to too severe a test by use. As much
as possible, I sought to remain hidden in the terrorized city, and to
slip out of it for Malines and the villages near the Dutch frontier,
without showing my _papiers_ any more than was absolutely necessary.

The frontier between Belgium and Holland is of so serrated a nature
that at the time of which I am speaking it was comparatively easy for
a hunted man like myself to cross into neutral territory. To do so now
would be almost impossible, so well do the Germans guard the irregular
line, the configuration of which is such that it is difficult, in
places, to tell whether you are in Holland or in Belgium. Fortunately,
I had come into contact with a person who was expert in getting young
Belgians across the frontier into Holland, and he agreed to help me.

Here, again, I cannot--on account of those who risked their lives in
befriending me--go into too many details. Suffice it to say, that on
the evening of my escape from the frontier village of A---- I was
instructed to walk to a certain milestone, where I should find a man
with a red muffler, sitting on a heap of stones.

There, sure enough, I found him--an elderly man with his hands folded
over the top of his stick, his chin resting on his hands, and his eyes
gazing innocently into the gathering dusk.

As I passed him I uttered the word "Belgica," which I had been told to
pronounce, and keep on, without once turning my head.

Very soon I heard his footsteps and the tap, tap of his stick. He
overtook me with alert step, and on reaching me, said: "Follow me."

We shot off from the main road into a small winding pathway, which we
followed for some fifty yards. Then, suddenly stopping, the man in the
red muffler exclaimed: "Holland!"

No word ever before sounded to me so sweet as that. Overcome by the
thought that once more I was standing on free ground--that I had but to
follow the pathway on which I stood to reach a Dutch village--and that
the journey thence to a port and my beloved France _viâ_ England, was
but a question of time, I remained for a few seconds lost in reverie.
At last, mastering my emotion, I prepared to set off before darkness
completely enveloped the wild landscape which surrounded me. Before
putting my best foot foremost, however, I was seized with a desire to
thank the man who had guided me there, so I turned half-round to press
his hand. To my surprise, however, I found that he had disappeared, and
that only the gleam of his red muffler marked his progress down the
path.




TALES OF THE SPIES AND THEIR DANGEROUS MISSIONS

_Revelations of Methods and Daring Adventures_

_Told by Secret Service Men of Several Countries_

  It is estimated that more than a hundred thousand spies and agents
  have been in the service of the various countries during the War.
  Several thousand have been captured and several hundred have been
  executed. The German spy system in the United States alone was a
  powerful organization at the beginning of the war. But the American
  Secret Service, one of the greatest organizations of its kind in
  existence, thwarted their plots, interned them in large numbers,
  and drove such men as Boy-Ed and von Papen from our shores. The
  interception of the Zimmerman note to Mexico, the revelations of
  the Swedish duplicity in Argentine, the discovery of Bolo, the
  French financier, the plots in India--and hundreds of others have
  been exposed by the genius of the United Secret Service. Most of
  these stories cannot be told until long after the War, but a few of
  them, gathered from American and European sources, are told here.


I--HOW THE SPIES WORK IN EUROPE

The extraordinary ingenuity shown by spies in securing the plans of
other countries' fortifications has been amply illustrated in the war,
although, of course, we know but a little part of what the spies have
accomplished.

A woman was caught at the French frontier seeking to enter Switzerland
and presumably intending to return to Germany or Austria. She was
thoroughly searched by a matron, as is customary in such cases, but
nothing was found.

Certain actions of hers, however, had given rise to serious suspicions,
and one of the cleverest officers of the French Secret Service was
detailed to examine her. He applied several tests to her. He finally
obtained what he wanted by seating her, in an undraped condition, tied
to a chair, before a warm fire.

"Brutes, you are going to burn me alive!" she shrieked as she was
forced into a chair.

"Be calm, madame," said the officer. "We only want to admire your
beautiful back."

There appeared on the ample back of this fair-haired lady an elaborate
design. To the experienced eye of the officer it represented a plan of
one of the most important French fortresses. The number of guns, their
sizes and positions were shown. The angles, sallies and extent of the
fortifications were clearly indicated. The weak spots in the defense
were made clear. This fortress had been entirely made over since the
outbreak of the war, and it was of vital importance to the Germans to
know its present arrangements.

A German spy in France, evidently a man with military knowledge, had
obtained access to the fortress, but there was but slight chance of
his getting home with his knowledge. He had, therefore, used the young
woman as an innocent looking agent.

The master spy had traced the plans on her back with sulphate of
copper. This liquid leaves no mark on the skin under normal conditions,
but when exposed to considerable heat it shows up dark blue. For
further secrecy, it is stated, the plan of the fortress was concealed
within another design in the manner described by General Sir Robert
Baden-Powell. He carried with him an illustrated book on butterflies
and from this he made what would appear to be specimens of butterflies
seen in the surrounding country. Then when he had obtained the details
of a fortress he drew them in among the complicated markings on the
wings of the butterfly. There they would escape notice by any but the
most expert "spy trappers."

Miss Sari Petrass, the beautiful Hungarian dancer, who was for some
time a great favorite in London, is reported to have been shot in
Budapest as a spy. She is supposed to have been engaged in gathering
military information in her native country for the benefit of England,
where she made her greatest artistic success.

When war began, the actress was starring in "The Marriage Market,"
a Hungarian operetta, at Daly's Theatre in London. She immediately
returned to Budapest, but instead of continuing on the stage began a
round of social activities.

She wrote letters to the British army authorities, it is charged, which
were sent by way of Switzerland in the in the care of young Austrian
officers, who had been beguiled by her charms. It is said she was
betrayed by one of her dupes in a fit of jealousy. Although an actress,
she had a high social position and was a niece of the Countess Ilka
Kinsky, one of the most prominent members of the Austro-Hungarian
nobility.

Miss Petrass, according to the report which reached her friends in
Cleveland, Ohio, was put to death immediately her acts were discovered.
When taken to the place of execution she fainted and was unconscious
when shot. The announcement of her execution was the first news her
family had of the charges against her.

The method of concealing plans of fortifications on the skin of a spy,
already referred to, has been employed with many variations. In time
of war or when suspicion of spies is very keen, it is likely to be
very useful. Then, again, women are usually called upon to carry this
kind of information, because they are less subject to suspicion and
watchfulness.

Tattooing plans on a woman's skin has often been resorted to in past
wars, but the anti-spy officers are now so keen that this way is no
longer reliable. Various forms of writing on the skin, which only
become visible under certain conditions, have, therefore, been tried.
One form of this has already been mentioned. Plans and messages are
also written in nitrate of silver, which becomes visible and black on
exposure to sunlight. The writing is also done with phosphorus, so that
it is only visible in the dark, but that lasts a few hours only.

Women have shown extraordinary ingenuity in carrying information during
the present war. One wore a large pair of pearl earrings, which, when
examined, proved to be stuffed with long messages. Another had a little
woolly pet dog, whose tail was found to be artificial and filled with
military plans. Another carried a message scratched on the plate of her
false teeth.

When it has been found impossible for a human spy to reach a fortress,
birds have been employed. Carrier pigeons are fitted with miniature
cameras fastened across their breasts by exceedingly fine wires. These
are fitted with a time lock which ensures their exposure at a certain
time.

The pigeons are released by spies at a place from which they will be
sure to fly over the fortress on their way home. A pigeon flies in
circles on its journey, and it is certain that during part of its
flight over the fortress the camera shutter will be released. A series
of pictures taken in this way will give a very complete plan of the
defenses to the enemy.

Although immediate execution follows the discovery of a spy or perhaps
even the suspicion of espionage, thousands of persons are found
willing to undertake the work during this war. It has been truly said
that the highest form of heroism is to undertake spy duty for one's
country. Nothing can be more awful than the fate of the spy caught and
executed amid the hate and fear of the thousands who surround him. Many
photographs sent from the seat of war show how the European armies make
the death of the spy terrible.

The Germans are universally admitted to be more skilful spies than
the British, and yet Gen. Baden-Powell performed some remarkable
spying tricks. He tells how he got into a new German dockyard and made
observations under the nose of several policemen:

"Inside a great, high wall lay a dockyard, in which, it was rumored,
a new power house was being erected, and possibly a dry dock was in
course of preparation.

"The scaffolding of the new house towered above me, and a ladder led
upward on to it. Up this I went like a lamplighter, keeping one eye on
the corner of the building lest I should be followed.

"Presently I found a short ladder leading from my platform to the
stage below, but it did not go to the ground. Peering quietly over the
scaffolding, I saw my friend the policeman below, still at fault. I
blessed my stars that he was no tracker, and therefore had not seen my
footmarks leading to the foot of the ladder.

"Then I proceeded to take note of my surroundings and to gather
information. Judging from the design of the building, its great
chimneys, etc., I was actually on the new power-house. From my post I
had an excellent view over the dockyard, and within one hundred feet of
me were the excavation works of the new dock, whose dimensions I could
easily estimate.

"All these duties (of espionage) are subdivided among agents of
every grade, from Ambassadors and their attachés downward. Naval and
military officers are sent to carry out special investigations by
all countries, and paid detectives are stationed in likely centres to
gather information."

The General further says that the military information that a country
voluntarily gives to a foreign attaché is usually of little value, and
therefore he must take secret means to inform himself.--(Told in _New
York American_.)


II--STORY OF MLLE. MATA HARI, DUTCH-JAVANESE DANCER

The story of Mata Hari, the beautiful dancing girl, who as a German
spy discovered the information about the British "tanks" before they
arrived at the Battle of the Somme, is one of the most romantic of the
War. She was found guilty of espionage and condemned to death by a
military court martial presided over by Col. Sempron.

"Accused did wilfully and maliciously, and against the interest of
la Patrie, communicate information of military value to the enemy
concerning our offensive of the summer of 1916," read the verdict that
sent her to a cell in Saint Lazare Prison awaiting the dawn which means
her death.

"Eye-of-the-Morning" is English for the Javanese pet name
"Mata-Hari"--the stage name of Mme. Marguerite Gertrude Zelle Macleod,
first known in Paris, and latterly all over Europe, as a dancer whose
specialty was the representing of Far-Eastern legends and fables
according to the terpsichorean art....

One of the most important and spectacular events of the only Allied
offensive of 1916 was the appearance in action of the newest engine
of war--the so-called tank. As with any innovation, the success of
the tank depended largely on the element of surprise attaching to
its debut. Therefore, the strictest secrecy marked the planning, the
construction, and the shipment of tanks to the Somme, where they first
went into action. But of course a certain number of people in England
and in France knew about the tanks--or "creme-de-menthes" as they were
first called in Paris because each one is named like a ship and one
called after the famous green liqueur. It took a good many months to
construct the first fleet, and a good many weeks to train the first
crews to stand the jerky, rolling, pitching, lumbering gait of the
mobile forts. During that period the circle of people "in the know"
increased, and Mata-Hari was one of those who heard about the curious
landships.

Where Mata-Hari obtained her first tip on the tanks has not yet been
disclosed. And that is one reason why the "memoirs" which she is
writing in her cell at Saint Lazare prison are being awaited with fear
and anxiety by at least one person, and with the liveliest interest by
the world at large.

It is rumored that a Deputy inadvertently gave her the first
information about tanks. And the rumor is strengthened by the fact that
Mata-Hari had plenty of coal for her apartment during the fuel famine
in winter. That in itself is proof enough to everybody of her intimacy
with some high official, as few people short of Deputies had influence
enough to obtain a hundredweight of coal during the bitter months of
January, February and March.

In any event, Mara-Hari learned vaguely of tanks early in 1916, when
the Krupp guns of the Crown Prince were daily booming nearer and nearer
to Verdun in that terrific struggle which was to mark the turning
point of the war. Mata-Hari also learned that the tanks were being
constructed in England and would be shipped to France _viâ_ certain
ports--and she got the names of the ports.

Then Mata-Hari decided she must return to her native country, Holland.
For, with all her Javanese appellation, she was born near Rotterdam,
although it is true she went to the Dutch East Indies when a tiny
child. She gave as reason for going to Holland the fact that she had
married a Dutch army officer with a Scotch name--Capt. Macleod, that
they had divorced, and she wished to arrange a settlement of their
common property.

Her passports were made out, and safe conducts granted for a trip to
Holland, _viâ_ England, of course, as that is the only way to get into
the Low Countries from the Allied side.

Mata-Hari went to England. But before she proceeded to Holland,
as Secret Service agents of the British and French Governments
ascertained, she visited a certain English manufacturing city, where,
it so happened, the tanks were being constructed.

Evidently Mata-Hari did not find out much about the tanks there, as
not a man connected with their construction ever passed through the
gates of the high brick wall which surrounded the factory during the
six months that the first "fleet" was building. The men were boarded,
entertained and employed here continually. Every letter they sent out
or received was subjected to the most rigorous censorship.

The dancer proceeded to Rotterdam. Investigation there has since proved
that she had no "communal rights property" to settle with any one, and
further that Capt. Macleod of the Dutch Army was known among his fellow
officers as pronouncedly pro-German.

Soon Mata-Hari returned to Paris. She was seen at the Café de Paris and
at Maxim's, and at Armenonville in the Bois with an English officer
who wore on the lapel of his collar, an insignia denoting his branch
of service, a little twisted brass dragon. Months later, when more of
these badges were seen on British officers passing through Paris, it
became known that the dragon was of the official insignia denoting
service with the tanks.

Mata-Hari sported a new bauble soon after taking up with the
Englishman--a jewelled replica of his gold insignia--her dragon had
real emeralds for eyes, and a carrot-shaped ruby for a tongue darting
from its opened fangs.

In May, 1916, a little more than a month before the Somme offensive
opened and tanks were first used, Mata-Hari appeared before the police
magistrate of her district and requested a safe conduct to visit a
certain port in France. The reason she gave was that her fiance, an
English officer, was seriously wounded and in hospital there. He had
sent for her to come to see him. Perhaps they would be married at his
deathbed if he could not recover, she volunteered, dabbing at her eyes
with a lace handkerchief.

The safe conduct was made out, and Mata-Hari arrived at a certain
French port almost simultaneously with the first consignment of tanks
shipped over from England.

Now a tank of the early type was 35 feet long, 12 feet wide and 9 feet
high, and the caterpillar tractors rumbling under it and over it and
around it made a terrible din, attracting the attention of people for
great distances around. And because of the weight of the tanks they
could not be moved by rail, but had to travel under their own power. It
was impossible, therefore, to wholly hide the monsters from inhabitants
of that particular French port, and from the townspeople in the French
villages through which they passed on the way to the Somme front. Of
course most of the travelling was done by night, and tarpaulins were
always draped over the armed and armored behemoths.

But there did not seem to be much necessity for precautions, as nearly
all of the inhabitants of the districts through which the tanks passed
remained stolidly right there where they were. Few indeed were as lucky
as Mata-Hari and able to get safe conducts to travel about. But then
few were as beautiful and alluring as the dancer.

Mata-Hari remained in the French port for a week. She strolled about
the town at night and explained to the hotel clerks that she could not
sleep without taking a certain amount of exercise before retiring, and
that after being accustomed to gay life in Paris, she was not tired
until after midnight.

It was on June 1, exactly a month before Gens. Haig and Foch began
their drive astride the Somme, that Mata-Hari returned to Paris.
And the first thing she did was to apply for a visé on her passport
permitting her to go to Spain. San Sebastian was the place she
mentioned, as she explained she wished to attend the horse races there.
Her papers were stamped and sealed and she left almost immediately for
the fashionable winter resort in the south.

Madrid, Spain, and Nauen, Germany, are in constant wireless
communication. There are other radio stations, privately owned in
Spain, which can flash messages to Germany, according to Allied
intelligence officers who have investigated. And of course there are
innumerable German agents, spies and propaganda disseminators infesting
the land of the Dons.

Secret Service reports disclose the fact that Mata-Hari was seen much
in company at San Sebastian race track with a man long looked upon with
suspicion by the French Government. He was a frequent caller upon her
at the hotel where she stopped, and it was reported that he made good
many of the big bets she placed on horses that did not materialize as
winners.

Soon Mata-Hari came back to Paris and the apartment near the Bois de
Bologne. And once more the limousine owned by the individual whom rumor
has branded a Deputy, began rolling up to her door twice a week and
sometimes oftener.

Then came the simultaneous Franco-British offensive at the Somme. Tanks
went into action for the first time, and according to Gen. Haig's
official communique his "land ships achieved satisfactory results."

The tanks did achieve satisfactory results. More than that, they
revolutionized offensive tactics on favorable terrain by advancing
immune against rifle and machine gun bullets, or even against light
trench mortars whose shells exploded at a touch. They smashed by sheer
weight strong points and machine gun emplacements. They straddled
trenches, enfilading the occupants and crushed in entrances to dugouts.

But several of the tanks were put out of action--and not by stray
shells hurtling forward from far behind the German lines. They were
knocked out by small calibre _PENETRATION_ shells, fired from 37
millimetre trench cannons--the largest guns that can be handled from
advanced positions. Guns specially built and rifled, and fired at high
velocity and flat trajectory, so that, unlike any shell ever coughed
up by a mortar, they penetrated the object struck--even though it were
steel--before exploding.

Instantly it became evident that the enemy had become aware of what
was in store for him and had constructed an "anti-tank" gun. And when
the booty in the captured German positions was examined, the British
found they had several good specimens of Krupp's newest weapon. Several
German officers of higher rank taken prisoners confirmed suspicions,
by explaining they had received description of the tanks several weeks
before, and had been instructed how to combat them.

Now Mata-Hari is awaiting death and writing as she waits. She is
penning her memoirs rapidly, filling scores of pages a day in a
polyglot of French, German, Dutch, Javanese, Japanese and even English,
according to the mood she is in, says the prison warder.

And because she fears her history will not be finished before that
unannounced daybreak when she will be placed blindfolded before the
high stone wall facing a firing squad of French soldiers, she has
ordered her lawyer, M. Edouard Clunet, to plead for a stay of execution.

So Mata-Hari writes feverishly, and all Paris waits eagerly--except the
one who waits apprehensively--to see if she will name the "ami" who
gave her the first inkling of the tanks.

Pinned to the corsage of the Empire-cut black silk dress which
Mata-Hari wears in her narrow cell in Saint Lazare Prison is a curious
gold brooch. It is shaped like a twisted dragon, and its eyes are
emeralds and its darting tongue a carrot-shaped ruby.

"It will be there--right over my heart--when I go away--when I stand
before those men with guns aimed to kill me," says Mata-Hari. (Told in
the _New York World_.)

(Since these stories were written Mata-Hari has gone to her death
blindfolded before the firing squad. She met her execution stoically.)


III--ADVENTUROUS LIFE OF MATA-HARI

This is told by a man who for obvious reasons will not allow his name
to be used:

"I knew Mata-Hari in Paris. I called on her at her home at
Nieully-sur-Seine. The sinister character in Dumas' great romance was
not more cunning or adventurous nor played for higher stakes than did
Mlle. Mata-Hari. In many respects their histories should be printed in
parallel columns. But I believe that for adventure, for cunning, for
her great influence over the destiny of those with whom she came in
contact, Mlle. Mata-Hari was more dreadful than 'Miladi.'

"Her father was a subject of the Netherlands and her mother was a
Javanese. He died when she was an infant, and in order to protect
her from the dangers which beset a young girl of mixed blood in the
East her mother fled from Java with her when she was three years old
and entered Burma. There, to further protect her, she pledged her to
celibacy and placed her in a Buddhist temple to learn dancing. Then
it appeared that her destiny would be not unlike that of thousands of
other young girls in that country and similar in many respects to that
of the old vestals of ancient Greece. In Burma these dancers are called
bayadère.

"She told me that when she was twelve years old she was disgusted with
life and was determined to change it or end it. After a dance at a
great Buddhist festival in Burma, when she was about fourteen years
old, she saw a British officer and fell in love with him. It was her
first love affair. She managed to escape from the temple and joined
him. This man was a baronet and loved her. Finally they married. Two
children, a boy and a girl, were born of their union.

"I do not believe that she ever loved any man. It is certain that
she did not love her husband. At any event, the monotonous life of
a British official's wife was more than she could stand. The climax
came when a maid whom she had beaten and discharged caused one of her
gardeners to poison her infant son.

"The tragic sequence and scandal which followed the death of her
son still is remembered by old timers in India. She started an
investigation of the killing independent of the British authorities,
and finally, in her own mind, fixed the guilt on one of her gardeners.
She took a revolver, and, walking into the garden where the man was
working, shot him dead.

"She was arrested, but owing to the high position occupied by her
husband everything possible was done to suppress the scandal. Finally
she was told that she would have to leave British India. It was just
what she wanted to do. She left her home in the night, stealing her
daughter from her husband. She made her way to Marseilles and thence
to Holland, where she placed her daughter in a convent. Then she went
straight to Paris, where she learned that she was penniless, the
small fortune which her father had left her having, under the Dutch
law, passed to her child. Then she set about to captivate Paris. Not
satisfied with her conquest, she went to Berlin, to Petrograd, to
Vienna--she travelled over all Europe--and became one of the most
talked of women on the Continent.

"She met many men. One of them was a wealthy German, who was a high
official of the Berlin government. He bought a home for her at
Nieully-sur-Seine and furnished it in a style that was representative
of what was most truly Oriental splendor. There the two of them lived.
It was there that I first saw her.

"Soon she tired of this German. He was extremely jealous of her. Always
her art--her dancing--called to her. He would not let her dance. There
were many 'scenes' at home. Her life was not happy, despite the wealth
at her disposal.

"Then she met a one-time Minister of Finance, of France, and, through
him, his brother-in-law. He fell in love with her and she with him.

"This man was at that time the managing director of a great Paris bank.
He deserted his wife and bought a magnificent château in Touraine. For
two years they lived there. Then, one day, the police entered the bank
and arrested the managing director. He was charged with embezzling the
funds of the institution. He was tried and convicted and sentenced
to two years at hard labor. The woman then went back to the German
official at Neuilly-sur-Seine. They were living there when I left
France four years ago." (Told in the _New York Herald_.)


IV--STORY OF EXECUTION OF SUSANNA RAYNAL

This is the story of a French young woman who was executed by the
French military authorities in Bellegarde, the little Franco-Swiss
frontier village.... Women have figured prominently as spies in every
war. In this war their rôle has also been conspicuous. Some have
betrayed their country for money, others have betrayed it for the
love of adventure, and still others have betrayed it for the sake
of love--following blindly the men who lead them astray along the
fascinating and dangerous path of crime. This young woman was a victim
of love.

Not a word has been written about her death. Not a sigh, not a tear,
not a prayer from her friends and relatives. For they did not know what
had become of her. The French newspapers did not record the end of this
woman, who paid with her life for her daring, mad desire to help her
Austrian lover, who sought to secure French military secrets.

Her name was Susanna Raynal. She was the wife of Louis Raynal, a
lieutenant in the artillery of the French army. She was twenty-eight
years old when she was put to death. The husband, twelve years her
senior, was at the front when she was shot. Her lover was shot with
her. He broke down, quivering and crying hysterically while she kept
bracing him up, repeating: "Have no fear! Have no fear!"

She begged the officers to have them shot together, not separately.
She declined to be blindfolded, held her lover by the hand and kept
murmuring "Have no fear! Have no fear!"...

Several weeks ago I met in Paris a distinguished French diplomatist
with whom I discussed many incidents of the war. Our conversation
turned to the many varieties of spies and provocateurs and to the
motives that prompted them to betray their country.

Then he told me the story of this young woman who met her end so
bravely at the French-Swiss frontier. There were tears in his voice as
he related the details. For he knew the woman and he knew her husband.

"I was returning from London to Paris a few weeks ago," he said. "Just
as we were reaching Boulogne, on the boat crossing the Channel, while
I was in line in the dining room of the boat where the passports were
being examined by the military officers, I heard behind me a familiar
voice, whispering in German, 'Furchte doch nicht!' (Don't be afraid!)

"I turned and saw the wife of my friend, a French lieutenant who was
at the front. She felt somewhat embarrassed when she noticed me, but
immediately advanced toward me and introduced to me a tall young man of
rather anti-pathetic appearance.

"'This is my husband's friend,' she said to me. 'He was kind enough
to help me arrange my business affairs in London. Louis is at the
front....'

"Upon our arrival in Paris she asked me to visit her soon. She said
she wanted me to advise her in a certain important matter, that she
was alone now, that I could help her with letters of introduction,
for which she would be most grateful. She urged me to visit her the
following evening. I promised to call on her and bade her farewell.

"On the following evening, when I came to her house, her maid met me
at the door and said that madam was expecting me for dinner an hour
later. I asked her to tell Mme. Raynal that I had another engagement
for dinner.

"A few minutes later Mme. Raynal came out. As I mentioned before,
she was a beautiful young woman of about twenty-eight. She was most
charmingly dressed. She greeted me warmly and begged me to stay for
dinner. I told her I had another important engagement. She implored me
to stay. She said she was alone, and that she wished to talk with me
about a matter of great importance, in which she desired to enlist my
aid. I said that I would call on her some other evening.

"Then she told me that she wished to visit friends in Switzerland, that
she had some manuscripts of a literary character she wanted to take to
them, and that she wished me to give her letters of introduction to
several people, among them the Minister of War. I promised to call on
her the following evening.

"As I bade her good night, she kissed me and begged me to break my
other engagement and take dinner with her. I repeated that it was
impossible. Then I left her. As I walked down the stairs, I noticed the
tall young man I had met with her at Boulogne, going up in the elevator
to her apartment. That seemed more than strange to me.

"The next morning I chanced to be lunching in a café where I
occasionally met my friend, the head of the secret police department.
In the course of my conversation I told the peculiar story of the
woman and the young man, without mentioning her name. The police chief
listened intently and then said:

"'I think I know the woman. We are watching her. We are also watching
the man closely. He is an Austrian. They seem to be engaged in a
serious political conspiracy.'

"About two weeks later I met the head of the secret police department
in the same café. He said to me:

"'Do you know what has happened to that woman--Susanna Raynal?'

"'I haven't seen her since then,' I replied.

"'You will never see her again,' he said. 'She has been shot.'

"And then he told me how the police had shadowed her and her lover, how
some one who had made her acquaintance recently gave her a letter of
introduction to the Ministry of War. She wanted to help the Austrian
carry certain documents out of France and wished to get a special
letter from the Minister of War permitting her to take what she called
'manuscripts' to her friends in Switzerland.

"She came to the Ministry of War with her lover. They were taken to a
room, where they met an officer who told her that he would be glad to
arrange the matter for her. Then the police did what is usually done
in such cases. The officer walked out of the room for a short time,
leaving on the table near them a number of important-looking documents.
The man took some of these documents, and after the officer had
returned and had given them the letter they asked for they went away.

"On the following day they reached Bellegarde, the Franco-Swiss
frontier. They were searched, and the papers taken from the War
Department were found on the woman. Within one hour both were shot.
She met her death bravely. She held the man by the hand and tried to
brace him up. He was crying helplessly and hysterically....

"A few days ago I received information that Lieutenant Louis Raynal,
the husband of the woman who was executed in Bellegarde, fell on the
battlefield recently. He passed away without learning of the tragedy
that had befallen his home.

"He died in defense of his fatherland, which his wife, through her
blind love for a spy, had endeavored to betray. Perhaps as he was dying
of his wounds, his last thoughts and prayers were for his home and for
his wife." (Told by Herman Bernstein in the _New York American_.)


V--STORIES OF THE MILITARY SECRETS

The Paris papers contained a brief paragraph telling of a young girl, a
milliner, in the neighborhood of Grenoble, who had been caught playing
the spy for the Germans and sentenced to a long term of imprisonment.

"We don't shoot women spies any more," said a soldier from the Somme
front to whom I spoke of the story. "There have been no women shot for
a long time. They generally get about twelve years at hard labor."

"Are you as much troubled as ever by spies?" I asked.

He laughed. "As long as there is war there will be spies," he replied.
"You can't stamp them out. The only thing you can do is to try to catch
them. It was only a few weeks ago that we caught a woman spy on the
Somme.

"You remember when we took Bouchavesnes? Well, there was not much left
of the village when we got it. Our artillery had knocked it pretty
well to pieces, but we found an old woman there. She had remained all
through the German occupation, and had even managed to hide and stay
behind when all the rest of the civil population had evacuated. She was
in a cellar during our bombardment, and when we went into the town she
came out to welcome us, the only one of the original French inhabitants
of the village remaining. As it was French again, she insisted on
remaining. It was her home and she had succeeded in clinging on all the
time the Germans were there. She saw no reason why she should go when
the French came back into occupation.

"She stayed and did our washing for us. She was busy all the time, and
every morning she would take the wet clothes out and spread them on the
ground to dry. You could see soldiers' shirts and underwear all around
the cellar where she lived, and hanging on all the posts and pieces of
wall.

"The old woman pottered around and worked most industriously at her
tubs. She always came out when there were troops going through the
village and she would talk to the men, find out where they were going,
where they came from and how long they expected to be there. And
whenever she came out from her tubs she would go to her wash, lying out
to dry, examine it, turn it over, rearrange it. She was a wonderful
washwoman. It was a mania with her, having everything just right for
the French soldiers, who had won back her home for her in France.

"But the Germans seemed to know every concentration of troops we made
in that region. Their shells received us every time. We could not
make a move that they did not know all about. We set three men to the
special duty of finding out how the Germans got their information. The
first thing they found out was that there were more air fights over
Bouchavesnes than at any other part of the line. There seemed to be
always a Boche aeroplane hovering over the ruins. They decided that
there must be something about Bouchavesnes which made it a particularly
good observation point. As the old woman was the only thing that
distinguished the place from any other ruined village, they arrested
her.

"At first she denied everything, but the German accuracy in bombarding
our concentrations ceased with her arrest. It does not take a long
argument to convince a drumhead court-martial, and the old woman saw
that the game was up. She then claimed to be French, and said that
she had consented to spy for the Germans partly under threats, partly
because her life had been spared by them, and partly because they had
paid her well, and she had no other way of getting any money to live.
Finally, she acknowledged that she was German and had been purposely
left behind to spy when the Germans got out. She got twelve years at
hard labor."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Spies work all kinds of tricks. There was the old fellow who came back
to his farm just behind the lines and started to do his fall ploughing
with three horses, a red, a white and a black. He did his signalling by
changing the position of the white horse in the team. He was easy to
catch, as a team, especially a plough team, always works in the same
order. Some of our men who were farmers noticed how he was constantly
changing his horses about. They talked about it among themselves a bit
and at last one of them spoke of it to an officer. The alleged farmer
was investigated and shot.

"Spies are almost sure to get a certain length of time to do their work
before they are caught. We ran across a blacksmith who was one of the
most congenial fellows you ever met. He had his shop right beside one
of the main roads used by the troops in going back and forth to the
trenches and he always had a stock of wine and something to eat. His
shop did not keep him very busy and he was nearly always at his door.
He would talk to the soldiers, give them a drink, ask where they were
going and want to know how long they would be gone, so that he would
be waiting to give them another glass of wine when they came back. He
was very popular with the soldiers, because he was such a good fellow,
always ready with a joke and a glass of wine.

"But our concentrations were known to the Boches. Our men were being
shot down. We never could prepare anything in advance and bring it off
successfully, because the Boches knew just where we were getting ready
to do something. Some of our spy catchers got to work to find the leak.
They hunted through the sector for the best place to pick up news about
troop movements and they found, of course, that all the soldiers were
friendly with the blacksmith. His shop was raided one day. He had been
left behind by the Germans. He had a three months' store of wine and
food in his cellar. Of course, he could give our men wine. But he had,
also, direct telephonic communication from his cellar with the German
lines. He was shot.

"The worst case that I ever knew of--but it was not the only one of the
kind--was an officer in the French army who was a German spy. You can
see from that how thorough the Boches are. That man had been sent from
Germany to France when he was a boy. He had been educated in France and
had gone to the French military schools. He was an artillery officer
and one of the best. He was a lieutenant at the beginning of the war,
but when the Somme offensive began he was a captain in command of a
battery. For all that time he had done his work without being suspected.

"On the Somme he was in charge of his battery, which was firing ahead
of our men during an advance. The battery got a signal that their range
was too short and they were firing into our own men. The sergeant told
the captain, but he said they were firing according to orders and not
to change the range. The battery fired another round and got another
signal from the infantry that they were firing short. The sergeant
spoke to the captain again and the captain lost his temper and swore
at the sergeant. He ordered another round at the same range and the
sergeant refused. The captain tried to fire one of the guns himself.

"It was very important for the Germans to stop our advance at that
point. It might have saved Combles. But the sergeant knew as much
about the situation as the captain. He knew what it meant to have our
troops stopped there. We might have lost a brigade. We might have
lost a division. He threatened the captain with a rifle and arrested
him. It is something to arrest your own captain, but the sergeant did
it, and there was a drumhead court-martial and the captain was shot.
He confessed, when he saw it was all up with him, and bragged of the
two years he had escaped being caught and of what he had done. He was
brave enough, but--Well, think of it! Educated in France, an officer
in the French Army, living at the expense of France, living a lie for
ten years, waiting for 'the day' to betray those who trusted him. It
takes a German to do that." (Told by Fred B. Pitney in the _New York
Tribune_.)
