WHAT HAPPENED TO THE "GLENHOLME"

_Adventures with Submarines in the Mediterranean Sea_

  The merchant seamen whose voyages take him through the war-zone
  lives a hazardous life nowadays, but he treats it as "all in the
  day's work." The 'Glenholme' was sunk by a German submarine in the
  Mediterranean, and her crew underwent quite a lot of adventures
  before they were finally rescued. This tale was first told in the
  _Wide World Magazine_.


I--SUBMARINED OFF COAST OF MALTA

These are chancy times for sailormen, both those who man our fighting
ships and the crews of merchant vessels, but they must all take the sea
as they find it and do their best while their country is at war. Many
of them have faced death cheerfully in the execution of their duty.
Some have gone under, while others have endured wounds and privation,
as did the men of the British steamer _Glenholme_.

This staunch ship, steering wide of the land, cleared the southern
shores of Malta and stuck her blunt nose into the long smooth swell
that rolled up from the eastward. A ten-knot cargo-boat, deep-laden
with steel rails for Alexandria, she forged steadily onward through
the murky night. From stem to stern her hull lay shrouded in darkness;
not a single light gleamed from any of her portholes, and even the
lamp in her steering compass was veiled, for those on board knew right
well that hostile submarines were operating in various parts of the
Mediterranean.

Captain John Groome leaned his elbows on the bridge-rail and gazed into
the gloom ahead.

"We're all right so far," he said; "and from what I can hear of things
it seems that these beastly submarines are operating quite a bit to the
northward of our track. All the same, a sharp look-out must be kept or
we may fall foul of some other craft running, like ourselves, without
lights. I don't want to bump any of them."

"The ocean is a wide place, sir," cheerfully remarked the chief
officer. "We'll keep clear of collision easy enough."

"I hope so," replied the skipper. "And now, Mr. Bolt, I'm going to lie
down in the chart-room for a couple of hours, and I want you to call me
at daybreak. That's the time when submarines poke up their periscopes
for a morning look around."

The mists of dawn hung like grey curtains over the northern horizon
when Captain Groome, in answer to a call from the chief officer, again
ascended the bridge ladder.

"Anything in sight?" he queried.

"Nothing at all," replied Mr. Bolt. "It's a bit hazy to the northward,"
he added, "but the skyline is quite clear ahead."

Hardly had the chief officer finished speaking when a shot--apparently
coming from nowhere--shrieked overhead between the _Glenholme's_ masts.
A moment later the report of a gun came rolling down the wind. Groome
hurriedly snatched up his binocular glasses and peered into the haze
out abeam.

"Great Scot!" he exclaimed. "A submarine! Hard-a-port, my son. Let her
go off to south."

The helmsman ground his wheel over, and not a moment too soon, for
a white line, like the trail of a shooting star, streaked athwart
the surface of the waters. A torpedo had been discharged at the
_Glenholme_, but as she swerved and swung from her course the deadly
missile passed harmlessly ahead.

"Murderous devils!" ejaculated Mr. Bolt. "Attacking an unarmed ship
with both gunfire and torpedoes."

"Pass the word to the engineer to give her every pound of steam,"
shouted Groome.

As the morning haze lifted the submarine came into clear view--a dark,
sinister shape. She gave chase while the _Glenholme_ made off at her
topmost speed. Engineers and stokers did their best, and steam hissed
from her safety-valve as, on a zigzag course, she fled. Meanwhile the
pursuing craft hung doggedly in her track. The submarine, however,
discharged no more torpedoes; probably the German commander did not
wish to deplete his stock of these expensive weapons.

Gradually the pursuer closed with her quarry, until she was not more
than a mile distant, and then her twelve-pounder gun began to bark
viciously. Having found the range, the Germans fairly pounded the
_Glenholme_ with bursting shell, battering her deck-houses and funnel
into masses of twisted steel.

Groome and his crew did their duty well. They were game, quite game, to
the finish. The captain, alert and watchful, stood beside the helmsman
and directed the steering in such a manner as to keep the hostile craft
dead astern. Presently a flying splinter of shell gashed his leg below
the knee, and blood trickled into his boot as he bound up the wound.
Nevertheless, he kept his vessel going at top speed, for he knew that
British warships were patrolling the Mediterranean, and while the chase
lasted there still remained the chance that a swift destroyer might
suddenly loom up on the skyline and rush to the assistance of his
stricken and harrassed vessel.

No help came, however, and it was not long ere a shell struck the
rudder-head. With steering gear completely wrecked, the steamer became
unmanageable, and swung round at right angles to her course. Then,
seeing escape was impossible, Captain Groome reluctantly rang his
engines astern and signalled to the enemy that he was bringing his
vessel to a standstill.


II--"THE PIRATES LOOTED OUR SHIP"

It must not be supposed that the Germans thereupon ceased fire. By
no means. An unarmed and unmanageable British steamer wallowing
helplessly in the swell presented a fine opportunity for a display of
"frightfulness"; therefore, on general principles, they let drive a
couple of shots at close range. These shells hulled the _Glenholme_
forward on the waterline, and she commenced to sink slowly by the head.

Having accomplished her work, the submarine came close alongside and
stopped, with her gun trained point-blank on the stricken vessel. The
German commander, a stout-built man with bristly hair, emerged from his
conning-tower. He was evidently very angry.

"Vy didn't you stop before?" he yelled. "I haf used plenty of petrol to
catch you."

"I'm sorry about your petrol," suavely replied Groome.

"Vell now, hurry up and get your boats lowered!" shouted the Teuton. "I
gif you ten minutes to leave--no more."

The crew of the submarine, armed with rifles, stood on their foredeck
and watched the _Glenholme's_ men abandon ship. Some ten minutes later
three boats containing all hands--thirty-four all told--had shoved
clear of the sinking craft.

"Now," said the submarine commander to Mr. Bolt, who was in charge of
Number Three lifeboat, "I vant to make use of your boat for a little
time. So crowd your men into the other two boats, and shove Number
Three alongside my craft. Hurry up, now, or I gif the order to fire."

There being no help for it, Mr. Bolt and his men had perforce to do as
they were told. When the empty boat was pushed alongside the submarine
half-a-dozen Germans sprang into her and boarded the _Glenholme_, which
vessel was now deep down by the head, but still sinking slowly.

The Germans looted from their prize whatever took their fancy, while
that vessel's crew sat in the other two lifeboats and watched the
piratical proceedings with considerable displeasure. One man in
particular, a stoker who hailed from Limehouse, became extremely
indignant. Like the rest of the _Glenholme's_ men, he had hurried
to the boats with little beside the clothes he stood in. His other
belongings had been left in the forecastle, and he had to some extent
resigned himself to their loss; but when he saw some of his property in
the hands of the Huns he could not restrain his anger.

"The dirty thieves!" he yelled. "They've got me brand-new bowler 'at
and me gramophone." Then, outspoken and fluent, the Londoner stood
upright in the boat and gave the enemy his kind wishes.

"I don't wish yer no harm, blow yer!" said he. "I don't want yer to
get sunk, nor even captured by a British cruiser. Oh, no. I only wants
yer blighted ole submarine to fall foul of a steamer's bow some dark
night and get capsized. Then I hopes she'll float around for a month
bottom up, with the whole crowd of yer standin' on yer bloomin' heads
and yellin' 'Gott strafe England' until you choke."

Undoubtedly there were several Germans on board the submarine who
understood English well enough to gather the gist of the irate
stoker's remarks. They looked very ugly as they fingered their rifles
and glanced towards their officer for instructions; most probably the
Londoner ran a grave risk of paying for his temerity with his life.
It happened, however, that at this moment smoke was descried in the
distance. The German commander levelled his binocular glasses and took
a long look at it. Apparently this column of grey smoke caused him
some uneasiness. Full well he knew the rapidity with which, during the
hazy weather, a destroyer could appear on the scene and open fire. He
was evidently a cautious Teuton, for he gave a short, guttural order,
he and his men descended into the submarine, and she dived below the
surface, and so out of this story. How and when the piratical career of
this particular U-boat came to a sudden end cannot now be chronicled.


III--THEY WATCHED THE VESSEL SINK

Meanwhile the _Glenholme's_ crew sat in their boats and watched
their vessel sink. Her bows were by this time below the surface; she
was going fast. Her stern rose high in air, and for about a minute
the stricken and abandoned craft hung poised in this position--her
fore part submerged, her rudder and propeller a hundred feet in air.
Then, with a slow, slanting dive, she vanished from sight. Down
she sank, like many a good ship before her, to rust and rot on the
sandy-tide-swept floor of the Mediterranean.

The smoke which had been sighted previously was no longer visible.
Captain Groome and his crew in their three open boats had now to face
the chances of a wide and lonely sea. Each boat was well equipped,
and stocked with ten days' provisions; nevertheless, the weather
indications were not encouraging. Wind and sea were gradually
increasing, while a heavy bank of clouds in the north-west foretold a
coming storm. The captain shouted a few words of advice and instruction
to the officers in charge of the two other boats.

"It's no use trying for Malta against this northerly gale that's
coming. We'll just have to 'up stick' and run for Tripoli. You're quite
right, Mr. Bolt; the boats may get separated. If the sea becomes very
heavy we must lie to our sea-anchors until it moderates, or until we
get picked up."

The storm came. Black, rain-laden squalls drove across the restless
waters, which a strong and rising wind soon lashed into white-crested
ridges and dark green hollows. It was not safe to carry sail and run
before the gale; so, tethered by their painters to the canvas drags, or
sea-anchors, the boats rode head-on, lifting bravely to the charging
seas. Before nightfall they had drifted far apart and were lost to one
another's sight in the shrouding rain-squalls.

It must be mentioned that next day two of the boats were picked up by a
French steamer and their crews safely landed. This narrative will now
deal, therefore, with what befell Captain Groome and the twelve men who
were with him.

For the next three days these poor castaways suffered considerably from
cold and exposure; moreover, the captain had to endure great pain, his
wounded leg being stiff and swollen. However, on the third morning
after they had abandoned the sinking _Glenholme_ the wind and sea
abated, and the sun rose in a cloudless sky that gave promise of a long
spell of fine weather. Captain Groome gave orders to hoist the sail;
and, impelled by a westerly breeze, they steered for the northern coast
of Africa.

Soon after sunrise land was sighted right ahead--a sandy beach with low
and slightly undulating country in the background. Groome ran the boat
close inshore and then consulted a torn and sea-stained chart.

"Now, men," said he; "what with the gale and strong currents I figure
out that we've been driven a long way east of Tripoli. The breeze is
dying away, so we'll just have to get out the oars and pull to the
westward."

"How far is it to the nearest port, captain?" inquired one of the
sailors.

"Oh, about seventy to eighty miles."

"That's a long pull on short allowance of water," remarked the sailor,
with a rueful glance at their water-keg, which by this time was
three-parts empty. "Is there any fresh water around these parts, sir?"

The skipper gazed attentively along the shore before making answer.
"Well," said he at length, "it's a barren-looking coast, and no
mistake, but I see a clump of trees just beyond that point. Perhaps we
can find water there, and refill our keg. Anyhow, we'll go and see."


IV--THE CASTAWAYS AND THE ARAB HORSEMEN

They beached their boat in a little curving bay that lay between two
rocky points. Here, not more than a couple of hundred yards inland,
stood the clump of trees that Groome had noted. They found, to their
great satisfaction, that these trees grew around the brink of a
cup-shaped hollow, at the bottom of which bubbled a spring of clear
fresh water.

The overjoyed castaways drank their fill; then, with tin cups, they
baled up the water and refilled their ten-gallon keg. While this job
was in progress Captain Groome, accompanied by the bo'sun, clambered
up the sides of the waterhole to take a look around before returning
to the boat. On reaching level ground, to their astonishing and
dismay, they found themselves confronted by a band of about fifty
Arab horsemen. These men were Bedouins of the Senussi tribe--swarthy
ruffians of the desert, fierce and ruthless, who lived chiefly by
murder and pillage.

They were all armed, some with old-fashioned long-barrelled guns, and a
few with modern rifles, while each man had long knives stuck around his
girdle. These fierce nomads saw plainly that the white men were unarmed
and helpless. Nevertheless, their chief--a tall Arab who was mounted
on a white horse--pointed at the two castaways and shouted aloud to
his followers. Evidently he gave the order to kill, for several of
the swarthy miscreants levelled their rifles and fired point-blank.
The bo'sun dropped, stone dead, with a bullet in his brain, while
Captain Groome, shot through the shoulder, fell to earth and lay
there unconscious and apparently lifeless. For more than an hour the
unfortunate ship-captain remained senseless and inert. The wonder is
that he did not bleed to death; however, he lay so still that, luckily
for him, the blood congealed and caked over his wounds. When at length
his consciousness returned he found that in the meantime events had
been happening with startling rapidity.

It might be supposed that, after shooting Groome and the bo'sun, the
Arabs would have murdered the remainder of the castaways out of hand,
yet it transpired that they did not do so. Most probably it occurred
to these desert nomads that it would be more profitable to carry the
white men inland and hold them for ransom, therefore they took them as
prisoners. Next, the Bedouins looted the boat that lay drawn up on the
beach, taking all her portable equipment, such as provisions, rope, and
canvas. Then, apparently quite satisfied with their day's work, they
watered their horses and camped, to rest awhile beside the spring.

Half-a-dozen armed Bedouins kept guard on the prisoners, who sat in a
dejected group. Things were looking very black indeed for these poor
seamen when suddenly--almost by magic it seemed--deliverance came in
the form of a patrol steamer flying the British flag.

Steaming quite close inshore, she glided into view from behind an
adjacent point. So close was the vessel when she rounded the headland
that those on board could hear the shout of delight raised by the
surviving castaways.

The lieutenant in charge of the patrol boat--a keen and alert young
officer--was not long in grasping the situation. He saw the boat drawn
up on the beach, and heard the prisoners shouting for aid. Therefore,
when the startled Bedouins hastily mounted and made off, this capable
young naval officer knew just what to do--and he did it.

A band of badly-scared Arab horsemen started off inland, using whip
and spur in desperate efforts to escape, but at that moment the patrol
steamer's machine-gun took a glad hand in the game. The gun rattled
briskly, streams of lead whistled shoreward, and the tall Arab chief
who rode the white horse pitched headlong from his mount to the earth;
then he lay quite still. He was as dead as salted herring; to use
colloquial English, he had got "all that was coming to him."

The remaining miscreants rode hard for safety, but the machine-gun did
good work, and during the following few minutes at least a dozen desert
marauders finished altogether with the joys and sorrows of this world.
Those who managed to escape disappeared, together with a number of
riderless horses, behind a distant sand-hill.

Captain Groome and his men were promptly taken on board the patrol
vessel. The bo'sun, poor fellow, was buried where he lay. The skipper's
wounds were dressed by the ship's surgeon, and under kind and skillful
treatment he soon began to mend.

The writer saw Groome about six weeks later. He moved stiffly, like
a man whose wounds have but recently healed; nevertheless, he looked
well, and was certainly very cheerful.

"How do I feel?" said he, in answer to my query. "Oh, my shoulder is
still a bit sore, but otherwise I'm feeling first class. Another week
or so, and I'll be fit and ready to join another ship."




WHAT THE KAISER'S SON SAW ON THE BATTLEFIELD

_Personal Experiences of a German Prince_

_Told by Prince Oscar of Prussia, Fifth Son of Emperor William_

  His Royal Highness Prince Oscar of Prussia, fifth of Kaiser
  Wilhelm's six sons, has written a little book called "The Winter
  Battle," a translation of which is printed herewith. In this he
  describes the terrific fighting of the Third German Army, which
  formed an important part of the battle front in Champagne and
  had to meet a particularly desperate attack by the French. The
  Prince was an officer on the staff of the commanding General. As a
  result of his experiences he was laid up with an attack of heart
  failure. It is interesting to note that "Hill 196," which is one
  of the places particularly mentioned in the Prince's narrative as
  being defended by the Germans last Winter, was captured by the
  French on October 25, 1915, and became once more the centre of
  prolonged fighting. The Prince is twenty-seven years old, and was
  married morganatically on the day war was declared to Countess Ina
  von Bassewitz Levetzow, a young noblewoman not of royal birth.
  The proceeds of the sale of his book are given to the widows and
  orphans of German soldiers who fell in the Champagne. Translation
  for the _New York American_.


I--PRINCE OSCAR TELLS ABOUT BATTLE OF CHAMPAGNE

The great Winter battle in the Champagne in 1915 resulted in a
brilliant victory, which I witnessed with my own eyes.

The past has already begun busily to weave her heavy veil, and side
by side with the past walks her sister--oblivion! But we--we must
not, we dare not forget. Not only because the war in the Champagne
was the greatest and longest defensive battle in the history of the
world and resulted in a magnificent victory for ourselves; not only
out of gratitude for our heroic leaders and soldiers who accomplished
the superhuman, endured the unspeakable, and yet, undaunted, fought
on to victory; there is another deeper, more salient reason why we
must not forget. I refer to our hero dead, who, with incomparable
self-abnegation, gave their lives for king and country, for Emperor and
empire, for home and nation.

As a child which one of us has not stood at the grave of some unknown
hero of forgotten days, thrilling with rapturous, fearsome awe? On the
heights north of le Mesnil in the Champagne there is now a grave of
this sort which should be dear to every German heart, but it is not
the grave of an unknown hero of bygone days. Many brave men of our
own glorious army, much noble blood of our beloved German nation have
found their last resting place there on French soil. Our own brothers,
sons and husbands are interred there. Many thousands of heroes, who
have entered the last long silence, slumbering there under the very
sod which they themselves, dauntless, fearless, reckless of danger,
defended to the last breath, cry to us from beyond the grave, "Do not
forget the cause for which we died, for which we gladly and willingly
gave our lives."

We, the living, who know what these dead heroes accomplished and how
they furthered our cause, lower the sword in memory of them, and, in
spirit, lay a laurel wreath upon that hill, vowing that we will go and
do likewise.

In order to comprehend thoroughly the significance of the war in the
Champagne and to appreciate the magnitude of the achievements of our
troops we must briefly summarize the circumstances which made the
campaign imperative, the end which it was intended the titanic struggle
should compass, and the conditions which made this victory such an
important one to us. A few sentences will suffice to make all this
clear. It was necessary to crush the first large aggressive movement on
the part of the French, who, by hurling their finest army corps and an
enormous artillery force against us in the Champagne, tried for weeks
and months, at whatever cost, to force a wedge into our lines in order
to break one link in the steel chain with which the German army had
encircled their land.

If, as intended, they had succeeded in breaking through our lines with
a strong contingent, it can readily be seen how disastrous this would
have been for us. As regards consequences, our success in the Champagne
was at least of as great importance as the victories of Tannenberg, the
Masurian Lakes, near Augustow and on the San; but when we take into
consideration the demands which were made upon individual endurance and
courage in the face of the most harrowing conditions imaginable, it is
doubtful whether the work done in the Champagne by our troops has ever
been equalled.


II--THE PRINCE PRAISES HIS TROOPS

In order thoroughly to appreciate the heroic steadfastness and the
patient endurance shown by our troops, which transcended all praise,
and to appraise properly the difficulties which beset leaders and men
alike during the long, bitter weeks of the battle, we must remember
certain facts.

When the French offensive was begun on a large scale on February 16,
our troops had already seen months of the hardest sort of service in
repulsing the French First and Seventeenth Army Corps, with only a few
very short intervals of rest--our Eighth Army Corps having been engaged
in this region since December 8, and the Eighth Reserve Corps since
December 19, 1914.

Our regiments, therefore, were far from unfatigued at a moment when
they were called upon to enter the severest phase of a struggle into
which our foes hurled the flower of their troops. Moreover, the French
had at their command an almost inexhaustible supply of ammunition, and
were able, therefore, in a steadily ascending scale, gradually to reach
the full amplitude of their fighting capacity in their efforts to break
through our lines. If we fully visualize this fact then we must realize
that an almost incredible glory accrues to the work done by our troops.
Only an iron will, a discipline which had become second nature and
utter forgetfulness of self could lead to victory in the face of such
odds. That these qualities did ultimately assure us the victory will
redound to the undying glory of all the troops which did active service
in this great engagement.

The prodigious masses of iron and humanity which our foes hurled
against us day and night, their marvellous ingenuity in making attacks,
their doggedness in defense, all this was admirably calculated to crush
larger numbers than those of our Third Army. It was a struggle between
iron and steel. It is true that a heavy mass of iron can through sheer
weight bend and indent a narrow band of steel, but it cannot break
the steel. Thus, through continually renewing their attacks and by
training upon us an artillery fire the violence of which beggars all
description, the French succeeded in bending back our lines here and
there. Sometimes at one part, sometimes at another they took several
hundred mètres of intrenchments; but they paid a horrible, a ghastly
price in blood for these minor and valueless successes, which profited
them nothing save that they taught them the bitter lesson that German
will power and German discipline can be broken by nothing. The French
had scornfully proclaimed that they had broken the backbone of our
resistance, but we broke their attack and imposed upon them our own.
In the end the French attempt to break through our lines was utterly
foiled, and the Third Army was victorious.

During this time the French attacks were directed principally against
the left, i. e., the eastern half of the Third Army, so that the Eighth
Army Corps and the Eighth Reserve Corps bore the brunt of the attacks,
most of which took place along the line between the position of Perthes
and Beausejour.

This is a rolling, open country, in which narrow fields alternate with
small patches of woodland, covered with pine trees. The country is not
dissimilar in character to the country near Jueterberg and Doeberitz,
in Germany, and instead of soil or sand the surface of the earth is
covered with white chalk. It is a desolate, barren country. The French
themselves call it the "louse Champagne" country, and never was a name
more aptly given. It boasted of only a few settlements, and these have
now been destroyed by the artillery fire.

During the entire time that the battle lasted the weather was vile.
For weeks it rained day and night, so that the chalky soil was
transformed into a grayish, soapy, slimy mire. In consequence the
by-roads became almost impassable for vehicles and the main roads,
connecting our trenches and camps, owing to the continuous use to which
they were put by marching troops and rolling provision wagons, were
soon in a condition which was almost as bad. The work of our munition
and commissary columns, upon which this battle, which lasted for
months, entailed particularly difficult service, was thereby rendered
exasperatingly hard. The horses also suffered severely through the
long enforced marches, the dreadful roads, the general wetness and the
insufficient food.


III--"HOW WE FOUGHT THE BATTLE--A LIVING HELL"

It is, however, the duty of the good soldier to derive some advantage
from even the most unpromising conditions, and we were able to turn
the frightful condition of the roads to good account in the following
way. The roads which the French commanded were less numerous and in
even worse condition than our own. As they expended a tremendous amount
of ammunition every day in "drum-fire," as continuous systematic
artillery fire is called in the army, they were forced to bring up
large supplies every night, which was not the case with us. As has been
said before, only the main roads could be traversed by the ammunition
wagons, because the other roads had turned into a sort of morass, and
we therefore trained our long-range guns upon their main roads at
night, knowing that we must be doing damage to them. This circumstance
probably accounted for the unusually long pauses which they allowed to
occur in their "drum-fire" on the ensuing days.

In this way we gained brief periods of respite for our infantry, which
was thus enabled to patch up the badly damaged intrenchments, so that
the French, when they had been supplied with new ammunition, had to
begin all over again.

The continuous rainfall created cruel conditions for the housing of our
troops. As has been said, the few sparse settlements had been literally
shot to pieces, and our troops were therefore forced to construct
their own huts and cave shelters. That such poor quarters, during an
incessant downpour of rain, were bound to have an injurious effect upon
the strength of the troops, is abundantly plain. Nevertheless, our
men never complained. With admirable patience, even good humour, they
endured the greatest privations and hardships which were the result
of the inclement weather and the inadequate quarters, and how great
these privations and hardships were can only be understood by some one
who himself has lived through a rainy Winter in the "louse Champagne"
country. Nevertheless, miraculously, the health of the troops remained
remarkably good.

Originally only the First and the Seventeenth French Army Corps had
been intrenched opposite to our Eighth Army Corps and our Eighth
Reserve Corps. Both of the French army corps had suffered severely
during their continuous attacks around Christmas, in January and the
beginning of February. But they had been reinforced continually.
Before beginning their great drive against our lines the French had
gathered together materially larger forces. To cope with our two army
corps gradually, in addition to the First and the Seventeenth Corps,
two colonial divisions and half a territorial division--all in all
almost seven and a half army corps were massed in a comparatively small
territory.

Furthermore, they had greatly strengthened their artillery. On the
other hand, our two army corps had been strengthened solely by the
addition of individual battalions of the Fifth and Seventh Armies, as
well as by the Sixth Army Corps and the Twelfth Reserve Corps (which at
this time belonged to the Third Army). The Eighth Army Corps comprised
the Bavarian "Landwehr" Brigade and the Hessian "Landwehr" as well.
Then, finally, there was the First Guard Infantry Division, destined to
play a prominent part in this battle.

In this terrific battle sons from every principality and kingdom of the
Fatherland fought shoulder to shoulder, and vied with each other in the
display of courage and endurance. Prussians and Bavarians, Saxons and
Hessians, men from the North and the South, from East and West, stood
side by side, cheek by jowl, forming an impregnable wall against which
the furious, despairing, fanatic attacks of the French were doomed to
futilely spend themselves.

The French fought with marvellous valour, with reckless courage and
nerve, climbing up and on over the bodies of their fallen comrades.
They were excellent fighters, were these Frenchmen. But our men were
better fighters, as the outcome of the battle taught us.

It was, however, not the attacks of their infantry which made this
battle so hideous for us, nor was it the hand-to-hand struggle in
the trenches, man against man, where the German, possessing greater
physical strength, was easily the match of the individual Frenchman.
What made the battle a living hell was the work of the French
artillery, enormous in strength, with huge supplies of ammunition which
was spent lavishly. Life in the trenches became a perpetual nightmare
and stamped as unforgettable heroes the men who went through with it
without flinching.


IV--"IT SEEMED IMPOSSIBLE ANY LIVING CREATURE COULD SURVIVE"

Onto a comparatively small area the French on one day threw a hundred
thousand shells! We found a French document in which the commanding
officer calculated that eighteen bombs must be the allowance per
metre of German trench, these eighteen bombs to be used not in a day,
but within one or two hours! The rapidity of the artillery fire was
therefore as great as that of an ordinary machine gun, but the shells
hurled against us were not infantry shells, but grenades of every
calibre. "Drum-fire" is the name for this sort of artillery fire, and
its effects were simply dreadful--unspeakable. The barbed wire was
completely annihilated, was clean wiped out of existence; the trenches
were flattened into mounds, their foundations crumbled away. No known
sort of earthworks were able to withstand such fire for even a short
time. But German discipline, loyalty and heroism held out.

When such "drum-fire" began, a huge wall of smoke and chalk particles
rose over our trenches, cutting off the men from the rest of the world.
The horror of the scene was augmented by the ceaseless rumbling,
thundering and crashing which filled the air, and which, even miles
away, sounded like a heavy thunderstorm. It seemed impossible that
any living creature should survive such a hellish turmoil. When the
firing ceased abruptly, or when its direction was changed to give
the French infantry a chance to attack us, then our brave fusiliers,
musketeers, grenadiers crawled out of the funnels and pockets into
which the enemy's grenades had ploughed the earth, made their way from
among broken foundations, crumbling cement, trickling sand bags, and,
grabbing their guns and wiping the dirt from their eyes, they repulsed
the French attack.

And this was done not once, but dozens of times.

Occasionally our men were ordered to abandon a trench which was
suffering particularly from "drum-fire" in order to avoid unnecessary
loss of life, and the crew from such an abandoned trench was then
placed in our second line of intrenchments. It sometimes happened that
French infantrymen, under protection of their artillery fire, reached
and took such an empty trench, succeeding the more readily because
they encountered no obstacles. Our soldiers then sprang forth from
their cover and attacked the French with hand grenades and bayonets.
Invariably we were successful in repulsing the enemy, causing them
heavy loss of life.

If for some reason or other this counter-attack was not made at once,
but was postponed for an hour or two, we were not so sure of success,
and it was then never secured by us without heavy casualties, for
the few hours that had elapsed had amply sufficed the French, who
are exceedingly clever at every sort of intrenchment work, to change
and remodel the trench for their purposes, to install machine guns,
to place sandbag barriers along both sides and to make sundry other
changes. This done, the "Frenchmen's nest" was complete.

The difficult task of ousting the French from their "nest" then
devolved upon our regiments, and in some instances many weeks of hard,
cruel fighting were required to accomplish this end. For this work we
employed underground mines, artillery, bombs and hand grenades. When
the time was ripe for attack, columns of volunteers were formed, which
were led by officers, who, in turn, were preceded by groups of pioneers
with hand grenades and intrenchment tools, to be used in demolishing
the sandbag barriers. The assault was begun simultaneously from both
sides. These attacks were usually conducted at night, and it will
readily be seen what cool, unshakable courage was required for work of
this kind. Immediately after the hand grenades were exploded our men
advanced and a furious hand-to-hand fight ensued, in which not only
bayonet and pick-axe, but shovel and booted foot were used to expel the
enemy, to kill him or force him to surrender.


V--BRAVERY OF THE GRENADIERS

As an example of the tremendous fury with which such a hand-to-hand
fight raged I will cite one instance. A grenadier of one of our Rhenish
regiments, who carried a pick-axe, had the thumb of his right hand,
which carried the weapon, bitten right off by a Frenchman. The German
soldier, writhing with pain, contrived to change the pick-axe to his
left hand, killed both the Frenchman who had maimed him and his comrade.

In another regiment three men had discovered that in making these
nocturnal attacks they could work together to splendid advantage. The
strongest man of the three took the centre. In his left hand he carried
two steel shields from machine guns lashed together. In his right hand
he held his weapon, bayonet or pick-axe. His two companions kept to
either side of him, as closely as possible. One carried as many hand
grenades as he could manage, the other was equipped with a bayonet.
Thus accoutred, this strange trio proceeded, striking, thrusting and
throwing grenades, and literally hacking its way through the ranks of
the enemy and striking terror to the hearts of the foe.

Excellent service these three men rendered. Evening after evening the
man who carried the steel shields volunteered for the difficult and
hazardous task. He was asked if he did not feel the necessity for
resting up, or if he did not prefer to serve the hand grenades or to
wield the bayonet for a change. He replied that less powerful men than
he could not as easily carry the steel shields and the pick-axe as
well, while the bayonet work and the throwing of hand grenades could be
done readily by the others.

The sharpshooters of the Imperial Guard had formed an entire company
of volunteers, who, led by officers, were always sent to perform
particularly dangerous and difficult tasks. They performed deeds of
incredible valour, and the "Tschakos," as Germans call this picked
corps, will not soon be forgotten by the French.

The men of the Saxon Reserve Infantry Regiment No. 107 were adepts in
taking French prisoners. They had a system of their own and found it
infallible.

Thus, at night, our brave fellows had to engage in hand-to-hand
encounters, at day had to endure the frightful fire of the French
artillery, and when the firing ceased there was still not a moment's
rest for them, for they then had to repulse the onslaughts of the
French infantrymen.

Nor was that all. The positions which had been shot to pieces by the
enemy by day in the field, had to be rebuilt, as far as was possible,
at night. The reserves were requisitioned to assist in this work,
although they had really been sent back of the firing line to rest up.
The Reserves were also frequently called upon at night to help defend
with the bayonet any menaced point. Thus their supposed "resting-up"
in the protected zone was somewhat problematical in nature, not alone
because they were frequently called upon to help out, but because the
French had a pretty trick of training their heavy artillery fire, night
and day, upon these outlying points, positions and roads. Unbelievable
as it seems, the men in the trenches actually suffered less from the
artillery fire at night than did the men in the rear.

Alternately fighting and working by day and by night, our brave men
performed the work of supermen. Each man was actuated by one thought
only--to defend his position to the last, to overcome the enemy, to
endure through it all, no matter what happened. Each leader, each
division, conceived it to be a task of honour to hold the position, or,
if it had been lost, to regain it.


VI--THE PRINCE GIVES HIS OPINION OF HIS ADVERSARY

Let us now consider the method which our foe employed in preparing the
attacks.

The French attacks must be classified as partial attacks and as attacks
en masse. The former invariably preceded the latter. The numerical
strength of the troops thus employed varied from a company to a
division. They were never an end in themselves, but a mere link in the
chain of a general, comprehensive plan. A destructive "drum-fire" was
followed up by an attack upon a particular trench. Having secured the
trench, they did one of two things. Either they used every effort to
secure a second trench, several hundred meters further along the line,
so that, working and fighting toward each other, they might reasonably
expect to unite the two trenches; or, using the captured trench as a
base for an attack en masse, they sought to indent our line and to
break it, a thing which was never attempted when a partial attack was
made.

In conducting these attacks en masse, the French always adhered to
their well-known scheme. A compact line of sharpshooters at the front
was followed at a distance of one hundred meters by densely packed
masses of company and battalion columns.

This method, of attack, from which they never swerved, occasioned them
a shocking loss of life. The losses sustained by a French regiment in
storming a position may be estimated conservatively at forty to fifty
per cent. French prisoners confirmed this estimate. To this wholesale
slaughter to which they condemn their men the fact is probably due that
the French rarely use the same regiment twice for purposes of attack.
Surely they must reckon with the demoralizing effect sustained by men
who have been forced to climb over hillocks of their own dead in order
to reach the enemy!

A French officer, whom we took prisoner, told us that the havoc wrought
by the German artillery fire upon the closed columns of the French had
been frightful. He added:

"These attacks constitute an insane slaughter; strictly speaking,
they are not attacks, but a mad dancing in shambles, through a
charnel-house, upon a cemetery. And yet we will be forced to continue
this way until the French Government sees fit to recognize the futility
of our method, or until we contrive to break through."

Not enough can be said in praise of our artillery. Heavy and light
artillery as well performed wonders. Their co-operation with our
infantry was wonderful--could not have been improved upon. Often,
our well-directed artillery fire nipped in the bud French efforts at
attack. Truly, the artillery which took part in the battle of the
Champagne has every reason to be proud of its record.

At the beginning of the period of which I am writing, the French
attacks were directed principally against our positions near Perthes
(the centre and left wing of the Eighth Army Corps). Then the French
concentrated their attacks upon the outer left wing of the Eighth
Army Corps and the right wing of the Eighth Reserve Corps (16th
Reserve-Division). Finally the French offensive degenerated into
a desperate, mad, wild struggle for the now famous Hill 196 (two
kilometers north of le Mesnil-les-Hurlus). At first they were probably
obsessed by the idea that the hill was valuable because of the outlook
which it afforded. Later, the government, or the War Ministry, seems to
have issued an order that the hill must be taken at whatever cost. They
paid the cost--paid horribly, suffered overwhelming losses, offered
hecatombs of victims, and still did not gain the Hill--thanks to the
heroism of the defending regiments.

This--Hill 196--was the most seriously menaced point, and accordingly
the Guard was installed there, which, together with the Rhenish,
Silesian and Saxon regiments, performed deeds of great valour. True to
the traditions of their race, they withstood the terrific onslaughts
made by the French hordes, onslaughts for the making of which the
French continually sent out fresh regiments. Attack after attack
failed. Those who escaped the fire of the artillery and the machine
guns fell under the butts and blades of the German bayonets.

Just as the interest and action of a drama continues to ascend until
the end of the last act, so the Battle of Champagne reached its
culmination and conclusion in the mad struggle that raged around Hill
196.


VII--"MAD STRUGGLE AT HILL 196"

In the last days of the frantic struggle, we had perceived that the
French were gathering in largely increased numbers in their trenches.
Then to our surprise the attack which we expected to follow did not
occur. We therefore deemed it reasonable to conclude from this that
the enemy no longer considered it expedient to push on, and that the
fire of our artillery was holding them to their trenches. Therefore,
on March 18, we were not expecting that any serious attack would be
attempted. But the French apparently were not willing to admit defeat
without one final, desperate effort.

Suddenly, on the afternoon of March 18, the attack was begun by densely
massed troops, their objective being Hill 196 and the position directly
east of the hill. The position of the Guards Reserve Infantry Regiment
No. 133 and other troops, who received the main shock of the impact,
was not to be shaken, however. The Fourth Turcos Regiment and others of
the French army attacked in five lines, advancing one by one, with some
of their officers on horseback. We received them with a shower of hand
grenades, which tore hundreds of them limb from limb and blew to atoms
the first two lines.

Succeeding lines fared no better. Those who miraculously escaped the
hand grenades were felled by our furious men with blows of pick-axe and
bayonet. In spite of their dauntless courage, their reckless contempt
of death, their marvellous persistence, the French were forced back.
Front and flank of this writhing maelstrom of densely packed humanity
rolling along in a disorderly retreat was swept by our heavy artillery
fire from 21-centimetre mortars, heavy field howitzers, 10-centimetre
cannon. The losses which the French sustained were inhuman and
sickening.

With this last valiant attempt to take the Hill 196 ended the Winter
battle of the Champagne. After months of frantic fighting, after paying
a frightful toll in blood, the French were forced to abandon their
effort to break through our lines. Their finest troops, the very flower
of their army, who had fought persistently with all the dare-devil
gallantry for which the French are famous, had, in the end, not only
failed to win a victory, but had sustained a crushing defeat. For the
fact must not be overlooked that their failure to force their way
through our lines was tantamount to a very serious defeat.


VIII--WHAT THE GERMAN PRINCE CLAIMS FOR HIS ARMY

The battle of the Champagne is over. The unexampled heroism, the
superhuman endurance of our troops have already become things of the
past. But we, the great German nation, will do well to heed the warning
that was sounded in the bitter days when the frenzied battle raged in
the Champagne.

What lesson shall we extract from this titanic struggle? What moral is
pointed by Hill 196, whose every inch of ground was ploughed by bullets
and soaked with our dearest blood? What were the underlying causes that
contributed to our victory? What was it that made every beardless boy
a hero, made the oldest man in the "Landwehr" forget his age and the
privations he was enduring?

Let us briefly review the principal factors that made for success.

The value of iron discipline was overwhelmingly demonstrated. It is
safe to assert that the most highly disciplined regiment will be the
most successful in action. Youthful enthusiasm may be undermined,
patriotism may be forced into temporary abeyance by hours of continual,
cruel shelling; worse than that, the very power to think becomes
inhibited in the witches' cauldron of "drum-fire." It is then that
discipline asserts itself. Nothing else gives the same moral stamina,
and in difficult positions discipline is bound to be the determining
factor.

Before the war began the voices of many people were raised who, from
false sentimentality, from undue softness, from ill-will or from
sheer stupidity, were eager to have an end put for all time to the
unconditional obedience and rigid drill of our army; in brief, to our
entire military training, the value of which has been tested and proven
throughout centuries. Many of our so-called comic papers made it their
chief business to ridicule military training and discipline, to spatter
with mud the very foundation and bulwark of our military efficiency. I
think the battle of the Champagne must have taught them to amend their
way of thinking.

"The iron rock upon which Germany rests more securely than the earth
upon the shoulders of Atlas is our glorious army." That this army
has reached this glorious summit is due primarily to its splendid
training, and the fundamentals of this training are to be found in the
latterly much-laughed-at and sneered-at detail work done in years of
peace. The standing-at-attention, the the clock-like precision, the
manual of arms, the goose-step--to all of these we owe the efficiency
displayed by our troops in resisting French "drum-fire," in repulsing
French drives, in withstanding with iron might French alertness, in
circumventing French enthusiasm and gallantry.

For instance, our Guard went through the attacks at Ypres. During
the bitter month of February this same First Guard Infantry Brigade
rendered futile and vain all the science and gallantry manifested
by the French troops at Perthes, and won new laurels in the frantic
struggle for Hill 196. Yet this crack regiment did not disdain, when
ordered to the rear for a brief, much-needed rest, to continue its
exercises and drills from the very first day of its holiday. In battle,
even, when under cover, this regiment went through the manual of arms,
practised positions and stood at attention.

One thing more. Let us educate our young men to be strong and hard. Let
us guard against influences that tend to soften or make for effeminacy,
so that, when future need arises, the coming generation may be able
successfully to cope with conditions similar to those which confronted
our troops in the Champagne. Let us weed out the poison which is eating
into the marrow of our national life--the cry for pleasure or youthful
liberties.

Then, too, let us instil in the youth of our nation simple faith,
a firm belief in the Lord God, whose will directs the destinies of
mankind. Those who went through the battle of the Champagne agree in
saying that without a firm belief in God they never would have been
able to live through those harrowing days, and to the handful, who
lacked faith, faith came amid shower of shells, during attacks of
bayonets.




A DAY'S WORK WITH A FRENCH SUBMARINE

_An American s Experience under the Sea_

_Told by Fred B. Pitney, by Authority of the French Minister of Marine_

  This story is told from "a certain formidable naval base on the
  coast of France." The American who relates it went out on scout
  duty on a submarine--for a single day. He tells how it feels to
  dive, the sensation of being shot at--not "unpleasant or trying on
  the nerves." Mr. Pitney is one of the war correspondents for the
  _New York Tribune_.


I--"WE FIRED NINE SHOTS AND SUNK BENEATH THE SEA"

To appear on the surface, fire nine shots at an enemy vessel and
disappear in safety, untouched, below the surface, all in the space of
forty-five seconds--this, I believe, constitutes a submarine record.
Yet, this feat I witnessed as an observer on board a French submarine
in active service.

Before this I was a passenger on a vessel that was attacked by a
submarine. A torpedo was launched at us from below the surface, while
we were anxiously trying to pick up the periscope of the submerged
vessel, for we were in dangerous waters. We had just discovered the
periscope when the torpedo was sent at us. Five minutes later the
submarine came to the surface and fired a round at us from the gun
abaft the turret we lay to and the passengers were transferred in a
small boat from the passenger vessel to the submarine. It was then
that I was on board the submarine while it attacked another vessel.

Thus, on the afternoon in question I participated in all the phases
of submarine warfare, including entering a harbor protected with net
and floating mines, filled with warships and surrounded with land
batteries. Possibly the most exciting moment of all in an afternoon
filled with thrills was when one land battery, uncertain of our
identity, fired three shots across our bows and we had to lie to and
prove who we were with a string of signal flags before we could proceed
on our tortuous path among the mines.

Our little vessel, put at our disposal by the French Ministry of Marine
to view the defences of a certain formidable naval base on the coast of
France, was calmly traversing the waters near the mouth of the harbor,
when a young officer, standing beside me on the bridge said: "We must
look out for submarines near here."

"Germans?" I asked.

"Oh, yes," he replied, "Germans, of course."

We had already passed through the net that protects the mouth of the
harbor and had been warned that we were going through a mine field,
and that sometimes, especially in bad weather, the mines got loose and
drifted about casually, getting in most anybody's way. Now we had the
added pleasure of a possible encounter with a German submarine.

"How many German submarines are there in the Mediterranean?" I asked.

"About thirty-five," he said.

Recalling my geography, it seemed we had a pretty good chance of being
seen.

"Are you a submarine officer?" I asked.

He told me that he was, and added that he would not change his work
for any other branch of the service. I told him that I had always
understood submarine service was particularly unpleasant and trying on
the nerves.

"Oh, no. On the contrary, it is very restful," he said, "and extremely
interesting and great sport."

"How old are you?" I asked.

He was thirty-two and unmarried.

"Perhaps that accounts for it," I said.

"Perhaps," he agreed. "I don't know. But it is the sporting interest
that makes the submarine service so fine."

He told of cruising in the North Sea, watching for German torpedo
boats, of weeks on guard duty in the Channel, assuring the service
between France and England, and of other weeks submerged in the
Adriatic, blockading the Austrian ports.

"We had to pick our way through the mine fields submerged," he said,
"and then lie forty hours submerged on blockade duty. When our turn
ended, we would pick our way back through the mines for a rest."

"But surely that was trying on the nerves," I said.

"Oh, no," he declared. "Not at all. We had a good rest there. There was
nothing to do but sleep and watch."

"What was the worst part of that service?" I asked.

"The hydroplanes," he answered readily. "They were always flying over
the harbor looking for us, and there was always the possibility that
one of them would discover us and drop a bomb."

"In that event what would happen to you?" I asked.

"No one would ever know," he replied, "unless we sank in shallow enough
water to be raised."

He said it in the most casual manner.

"Has there ever been a fight between two submarines?" was my next
question.

He had been in two in the North Sea, he told me. "If you are on the
surface, you fight with your guns," he said, "but, if you are under the
surface, you go at it with torpedoes; there is not much chance with
torpedoes, because you can only see the periscope and you have no idea
which way the other fellow is going. Nothing happened in either fight
I had. We both got off safely."

During this conversation both of us and four of the ship's officers
had our glasses on the sea, watching for submarines. One of the ship's
officers now announced a suspicious looking white wave on the port bow.
It was suspicious because it moved, but it was a very tiny little wave,
only about three feet long and the breadth of a carpenter's hand. No
one would ever have suspected it without expert advice.


II--ON A SUBMARINE IN A ROUGH SEA

That, as I learned, is one of the greatest dangers of the submarine. Of
course, we have all been told it many times, but when the thing is once
experienced it is truly appreciated, and not until then. The approach
of the submarine is more insidious than the taste for absinthe.

There is merely that little white wave only occasionally to be
seen--the white water curling around the periscope--and with the
sea running at all high there would be no white wave that could be
distinguished from the white tops of the other waves. Then, if the
submarine chooses to remain near the surface one can after a long time
of very close study make out the periscope as a very small stick, like
a piece of lath, poking up out of the water. But it only sticks up a
little more than a foot when it is the most willing to be seen, while
if, as in our case, it is not willing to be seen, the submarine, having
located its prey, dives deeper and all trace of it is lost, the next
thing being a torpedo coming from an entirely different point on the
horizon.

Our officers were experts at watching for submarines, and though the
little white wave made by the periscope disappeared, they caught the
white wake of the torpedo coming toward the port quarter and sheered
off to escape it. The torpedo passed harmlessly by our stern, but the
adventure was not ended, for hardly a minute later we heard a shot from
off the starboard quarter and, turning in that direction, saw that the
submarine had come to the surface and was busily firing at us to bring
us to.

We stopped without any foolish waste of time in argument. I asked if a
boat would be sent to us, or if we would have to get our boat.

"They carry a small folding boat," said the officer to whom I had been
talking, "but we will have to send our boat."

While we were getting our boat over the side, the submarine moved
closer in, keeping her gun bearing on us all the time, most
uncomfortably. The gun stood uncovered on the deck, just abaft the
turret. It was thickly coated with grease to protect it when the vessel
submerged. It is only the very latest type of submarines that have
disappearing guns which go under cover when the vessel submerges and
are fired from within the ship, which makes all the more surprising the
speed with which a submarine can come to the surface, the men get out
on deck, fire the gun, get in again and the vessel once more submerge.


III--IN THE SECRET CHAMBERS OF A SUBMARINE

I was in the first boatload that went over to the submarine. From
a distance it looked like nothing so much as a rather long piece
of 4 x 8 floating on the water, with another block set on top of
it and a length of lath nailed on the block. It lost none of these
characteristics as we neared it. It only gained a couple of ropes along
the sides of the 4 x 8, while men kept coming mysteriously out of
the block until a round dozen were waiting to receive us. The really
surprising thing was that the men turned out to be perfectly good
French sailors, with a most exceedingly polite French lieutenant to
help us aboard the little craft.

It was a little surprise the admiral of the port had prepared for us,
and nothing could have been better prepared to give us the true flavor
of submarine warfare. We had had all the sensation of being chased,
fired on and captured--everything except being sunk in mid-ocean. Now
we were to have the other experience of chasing and capturing the enemy.

The vessel we were in was a 500-ton cruising submarine. It had just
come from eight months' guarding the Channel, and showed all the
battering of eight months of a very rough and stormy career with no
time for a lie-up for repairs. It was interesting to see the commander
hand the depth gauge a wallop to start it working and find out if the
centre of the boat was really nine feet higher than either end. We were
fifty-four feet under water and diving when the commander performed
that little experiment and we continued to dive while the gauge spun
around and finally stopped at a place which indicated approximately
that our back was not broken. I suppose that was one of the things my
friend the lieutenant referred to when he said life on a submarine was
such a sporting proposition.

We boarded the submarine over the tail end and balanced our way up the
long narrow block, like walking a tight rope, to the turret, where we
descended through a hole like the opening into a gas main into a small
round compartment about six feet in diameter exactly in the midship
section, which was the largest compartment in the ship. Running each
way from it the length of the vessel were long corridors, some two feet
wide. On each side of the corridors were rows of tiny compartments,
which were the living and working rooms of the ship. Naturally, most of
the space was given up to the working rooms.

The officers' quarters consisted of four tiny compartments, two on
each side of the after corridor. The first two were the mess room and
chart room, and the second pair were the cabins of the commander--a
lieutenant--and his second in command, an ensign. Behind them was an
electric kitchen, and next came the engines, first two sets of Diesel
engines, one on each side of the corridor, each of 400 horsepower.
These were for running on the surface. Then came four bunks for the
quartermasters and last the electric motors for running under the
surface. The motors were run from storage batteries and were half the
power of the Diesel engines. The quarters of the crew were along the
sides of the forward corridor. The floors of the corridor were an
unbroken series of trap doors, covering the storage tanks for drinking
water, food and the ship's supplies. The torpedo tubes were forward
of the men's quarters. Ten torpedoes were carried. The ammunition for
the deck gun was stored immediately beneath the gun, which was mounted
between the turret and the first batch, abaft the turret. Besides the
turret there were three hatches in the deck, one forward and two aft.

There were thirty-four men in the crew. Each quartermaster was directly
responsible for six men, while the commander and his second were
responsible for five each. The men are counted every two hours, as
there is great danger of men being lost overboard when running on the
surface, and in bad weather they are sometimes counted as often as
every half hour.

The turret was divided in two sections. In the after part was the main
hatch and behind it a stationary periscope, standing about thirty
inches above the surface of the water when the deck was submerged and
only the periscope showing. There was no opening in the forward section
of the turret, but the fighting periscope, which could be drawn down
into the interior or pushed up to ten feet above the surface when the
vessel was completely submerged, extended through the top.

It is with this periscope that the vessel is navigated. The submarine
sails at a depth at which the fighting periscope shows about eighteen
inches above the surface, while the commander, standing on two iron
grips, with his head, shoulders and body in the turret and his legs
sticking down into the cabin, keeps his eyes glued to the sights of the
periscope, which he constantly turns from side to side to take in all
points of the limited horizon. The part of the fighting periscope that
extends above the water is a brass rod about two and one-half inches in
diameter, while its eye is only three-quarters of an inch in diameter.
It is on this tiny opening that both the safety and fighting ability of
the vessel depend.

For two hours, turn and turn about, the commander and his second stand
watch on the iron grips in the turret, one eye on the periscope, the
other on the compass. And this goes on for weeks on end. It is only
when they lie for a few hours fifty to seventy-five feet below the
surface that they can get some rest. And even then there is no real
rest, for one or the other of them must be constantly on duty, testing
pipes and gauges, air pressure, water pressure and a thousand other
things.

I met the next day another officer whose mustache and eyebrows were
black as jet, but whose hair was silver white. He was thirty-eight
years old. For six years and a half he had been a submarine officer, he
told me.

"Why did you quit it?" I asked him.

"Too old," he said.

"Is there an age limit?" I asked.

"No," he replied, "but a man knows when he is too old for the work."

Yet nothing would induce those who have not yet found themselves too
old to leave it. One would think the sailors, at any rate, would find
the life tiresome or too dangerous. I talked to several of them about
it, but they all agreed that they would not change.

"Is this life better than on a battleship?" I asked one sailor.

"Oh, yes," he replied. "I would not go back to a battleship."

"What makes it better?" I asked.

"It is more tranquil," he answered.

Tranquil, sixty feet under water and your life hanging on a gauge that
needs a good heavy wallop to make it work.

When we dropped through the hatch into the interior of the submarine
and the cover was clamped down over our heads the commander at once
ordered me back into the turret.


IV--"WE RAN SUBMERGED THROUGH A MINE FIELD"

"Hurry, if you want to see her dive," he said.

I climbed into the after section of the turret and fastened my eye to
the periscope. Around the top of the turret was a circle of bulls'
eyes and I was conscious of the water dashing against them while
the spray washed over the glass of the periscope. The little vessel
rolled very slightly on the surface, though there was quite a bit of
sea running. I watched the horizon through the periscope and watched
for the dive, expecting a distinct sensation, but the first thing I
noticed was that even the slight roll had ceased and I was surprised to
see that the bulls' eyes were completely under water. The next thing
there was no more horizon. The periscope also was covered and we were
completely beneath the surface.

"Did it make you sick?" the commander asked, when I climbed down from
the turret, and when I told him no he was surprised, for he said most
men were made sick by their first dive.

The thing most astonishing to me about that experience was how a
submerged submarine can thread its way through a mine field. For though
the water is luminous and translucent one can hardly make out the black
hull of the boat under the turret and a mine would have to be on top
of you before you could see it. The men who watch for mines must have
a sense for them as well as particularly powerful sight.

We continued to dive until we were sixty-eight feet below the surface,
too deep to strike any mine, and there we ran tranquilly on our
electric engines, while the commander navigated the vessel and the
second in command opened champagne in the two by four mess room. After
half an hour of under-water work we came near enough the surface for
our fighting periscope to stick twenty inches out of the water and
searched the lonely horizon for a ship to attack.

It was not long before we sighted a mine trawler, steaming for the
harbor, and speeded up to overtake her.

"Pikers!" said our commander, as we circled twice around the mine
trawler; "they can't find us."

Five men on the trawler were scanning the sea with glasses, looking
for submarines. We could follow all their motions, could tell when
they thought they had found us and see their disappointment at their
mistakes, but though we were never more than five hundred yards from
them I did not think they were pikers because they did not find us. I
had tried that hunt for the tiny wave of a periscope.

"No use wasting a torpedo on those fellows," said our commander. "We
will use the gun on them."

"How far away can you use a torpedo?" I asked.

"Two hundred yards is the best distance," he said. "Never more than
five hundred. A torpedo is pure guesswork at more than five hundred
yards."

We crossed the bow of the trawler, circled around to her starboard
quarter and came to the surface, fired nine shots and submerged again
in forty-five seconds.

The prey secured, we ran submerged through the mine field and past the
net barrier to come to the surface well within the harbor and proceed
peacefully to our mooring under the shelter of the guns of the land
forts.




TALE OF THE CHILD OF TERBEEKE

_How It Saved a British Battalion_

_By Oliver Madox Hueffer_

  In this little story the author sets down the facts of a very
  remarkable affair--how a child saved a British battalion from
  annihilation, thereby giving rise to yet more legends of the
  "Angels of Mons" description. A true story from the _Wide World
  Magazine_.


I--THE STORY OF HIPPOLYTE

In the days to come the historian will find fruitful scope for a work
on faith, as shown in the Great War. And among the "Angels of Mons" and
other celestial visitants I hope he will find a niche for the "Child of
Terbeeke."

I came across the story--and the child himself, for that matter--when
I was billeted with my battalion at Durdegem. Durdegem is as ugly a
little Walloon village as you need look for, but, internationally
speaking, it is as interesting as ugly. It stands on French soil; you
could almost throw a tin of bully-beef, if you were so unpatriotically
wasteful, into Belgium; what is, for all practical purposes,
temporarily Germany is not more than three miles away; yet English
is almost the only language you will hear in the streets. Even the
children, those who are left of them, speak English; they say "Na
poo" or "No bon," and sometimes, it is to be feared, a swearword, as
patly as a bombardier. This is really less surprising than that there
should be any children at all, with the German lines so close; but
things have been comparatively quiet thereabouts for months past,
and though some of the houses are still ruinous and others have had
their windows blocked with sandbags so long that already the grass is
beginning to grow upon them, the inhabitants have settled down to the
not unprofitable task of selling comforts to the British soldiers who
are always passing and repassing.

I was billeted upon Madame Tavernier, who owned the Blanchisserie du
Cygne and was rapidly making her fortune out of the laundry bills she
rendered to British officers, who are notoriously millionaires and well
able to pay for the privilege of defending Northern France. With Madame
Tavernier there was also staying--while other arrangements were being
made for him--Hippolyte, otherwise famous as the Child of Terbeeke.

Hippolyte was not yet six, but already he could say "Slee-o-pums" and
"Stunt-ease" and "Fum-fers" so plainly that any drill-sergeant would
have wept with pride to hear him. Also he wore the full uniform of a
British sergeant-major, with puttees and a walking-stick and the badge
of a famous Line regiment, all specially made and presented to him
for his very own. Also, although he was temporarily the paying-guest
of Madame Tavernier and allowed himself to be petted by a whole
serial-story of British officers, he had a service-battalion to act
as his father and to fight for him any battles he might wish fought.
It is to be feared that a precocious understanding of these facts had
made him rather conceited, and I do not think I should have liked him
very much had I remained with Madame Tavernier longer than three days.
Anyhow, this was his story, as related to me by that excellent lady and
vouched for by a cloud of witnesses.

Hippolyte came from Terbeeke, which is in the south of flat Flanders.
Madame declared that he was the son of a professor at Louvain
University, and added that the professor quarrelled with his wife soon
after the birth of Hippolyte, and that the wife thereupon returned to
her native village.

Hippolyte, therefore, at a very early age indeed, went to live at
Terbeeke. Terbeeke, I understand--for I was never there--lies just at
the southward edge of the Flemish flats. Northwards the country is as
flat as a drawing-board, criss-crossed with dykes and little canals;
to the east is a wide State forest, and to the south a range of low
hills. Between the little town and the hills lies what in pre-war days
was Terbeeke's one claim to fame--the Terbeeke mere or marsh, forming
a crescent to the south and west. I do not know how broad or wide it
is, but it has been famous for centuries as bottomless, and a whole
cycle of legend has grown up round it, dealing with the notabilities of
one kind or another who have been drowned in its brown, oozy depths.
Perhaps because of this evil fame it has never been drained, and is
to-day as darkly ominous as in the times of fairies and lubber-fiends.

The mother of Hippolyte lived in a small and lonely house at the other
side of the marsh from the town of Terbeeke. She must have possessed
some private means, for she seems to have carried on no business of any
kind, but to have devoted most of her time to religion, crossing the
marsh-arm several times daily to the parish church, which stood in the
centre of the town. Otherwise her days were passed in solitude, for she
lived quite alone with the child, their only companion being a large
dog. She passed the time not taken up by religion in wandering about
the marsh, for she had few friends, and the people of Terbeeke often
saw the three moving about the surface of the quagmire in places where
there was no known track.


II--IN PATH OF PRUSSIAN INVADERS

Time passed, and the war broke out. Terbeeke was not in the direct path
of the invaders, and, sheltered behind the forest, it almost seemed
to the townspeople as though they might escape the fate of the rest
of Belgium. But the respite was not for long. The low muttering of
distant guns grew every day louder; the stream of fugitives hurrying
through the forest and past the town towards the French frontier grew
always denser; at last the climax came. A British officer dashed into
the town at three o'clock in the morning and hurried into the Mairie.
The civilian population, it was announced, must evacuate their houses
instantly.

There followed the usual scenes of frantic terror and chaotic haste
that happened so often during the opening chapters of the Great War.
The one road out of the town was blocked with every kind of conveyance,
from bicycle to dog-carts; there were blocks at every corner; precious
minutes were wasted in useless recriminations; and long before the last
civilian had left, the turmoil of desperate fighting was heard coming
always nearer through the dim mystery of the forest.

It was one of the incidents of the Great Retreat. A flank battalion of
British infantry, by some mishap, lost direction. Cut off from the main
body, and fighting desperately, it was driven always further from the
path along which safety lay, until at last, flinging itself into the
forest of Terbeeke, for a whole day and night it held off the furious
attacks of a brigade of Prussians.

But the odds were too great. Slowly but surely the battalion was
forced back through the forest to the very outskirts. Back from there,
after another frantic assault, it reeled, reduced now to two sparse
companies--some three hundred men in all---across the little edging of
cornfields into the stricken streets of Terbeeke.

There, at last, it found some respite. The Prussians, having learnt
by bitter experience the fighting value of the "contemptible" little
force arrayed against them, jibbed at the open frontal attack across
bare plough-land, and remained hidden within the forest, awaiting
reinforcements.

Meanwhile the British remnant fought desperately to establish
themselves within the village and turn every house into a citadel;
while their commander, a lieutenant of something under twenty-one,
racked his brain for some way of escape. At one time it might have
been possible to skirt the northern edge of the marsh, but already
the attacking Prussians had pushed forward, and the British were now
enclosed within a triangle, formed as to its sides by the overwhelming
Prussian force, and as to its base by the impassable fastnesses of the
mere.

"Unless something happens pretty quick," said the C.O. to his
second-in-command, a boy of nineteen, "things are pretty considerably
all U-P." (He said something to that effect, I mean. Madame Tavernier's
narrative did not, of course, fill in such details.)

They were standing in the porch of the old church, gazing
disconsolately over the flat stretches of marshland. The Boche fire had
temporarily ceased, and they devoted the respite to seeking some way by
which the marsh might be crossed even at the eleventh hour. But there
was none, or none which they could discern.

"Wonder what they are waiting for?" said the boy, lighting a cigarette.

"Bringing up the guns, of course. It will be dark in an hour." The
young C.O. gazed hopelessly to where the sun was already dropping to
the cloud-capped western horizon, straining with ominous red the reedy
pools before them.

"Moon will be up, though."

"All the better for them. I should give the village another two hours.
And then----"

"You aren't going to surrender, surely?" There was the quiver of horror
in the young voice.

They were interrupted by the C.S.M. of B Company.

"Not more than ten rounds a man, sir," he reported. "Machine-gun out of
order." He made his report with the tranquil woodenness of his kind,
without a quiver of voice or muscle. (If you say that it is impossible
for me to know what these men said, or how they behaved, I can only
reply that I have been through the same sort of thing myself.)

"Thanks, major. Men come in that were sounding the marsh?"

"Report there is no way across, sir."

"They certainly won't find one now it's getting dark. Better get back
to your posts. They will begin again soon."

Even as he spoke there came the complaining whine of a four-inch shell
high overhead.


III--THE BABE ON THE BATTLEFIELD WITH HIS DOG

Possibly it was the new sound that woke Hippolyte, or perhaps Casper,
the mongrel wolf-hound, took it for the challenge of some ancestral
enemy. At least, some half-hour later No. 21687 Private John Smith, of
C Company, had a vision. He was not naturally an imaginative man, but
he hastened to report it to the C.S.M.

"Lummy, sir," he said, "if there ain't a bloomin' angel comin' across
the bloomin' marsh!"

And, sure enough, across the very centre of the shivering quag came a
small figure, clothed in a long white robe very like those attributed
to mediæval angels, and with a golden aureole about its head, cast by
the last rays of the dying sun. Actually it was no angel, but little
Hippolyte, looking for his mother. She had left him, very early in the
morning, to go to Mass, trusting him, as often before, to the care of
Casper. Usually she was not gone for more than half an hour or so. On
that day, however, she had not returned in one hour or in three. She
never _would_ return, for before the third hour she was lying dead in
the little square before the church-door--one of a group of six, men
and women, who had been caught leaving the building when the Germans,
in their first assault, enfiladed the main street with machine-gun
fire. They lay side by side, very peacefully, just as they fell, for
the hard-pressed defenders of the village had found no leisure to
remove them.

Hippolyte waited very patiently--as was his wont. He cried a little
from loneliness at first, but his mother, before she left him, had set
out the little portion of milk and bread that was to be his breakfast.
Growing hungry, he sought for it in its accustomed place, ate it, and
fell asleep again. It was the dog at last that disturbed him, later in
the afternoon, by whimpering and scratching at the door, and gave him
the great idea of starting out to find the mother who was so long in
returning.

Child and dog set out together along the imperceptible track of safety
that crept and twisted across the marsh. Alone Hippolyte would almost
certainly have strayed from it, but the dog's surer instinct guarded
him until, just at the moment when hope was at an end, he came as a
vision of hope to the spent company of Englishmen.

That is practically the end of the story, for you can imagine the rest,
except, perhaps, that the child, when he had almost reached the hard
ground, grew afraid of the sound of firing, the noise overhead, and
the gaunt, stark men staring at him in wondering silence. So he turned
homeward again, Casper stalking beside him, sacrificing his lust for
battle to his duty as foster-father. But they went slowly, the child
often turning back to stare with wondering eyes at the increasing chaos
behind him and, as the more impressionable among the soldiers would
have it, beckoning them to follow him towards safety.

Follow they did, but as unbeaten soldiers should, in good order and
with due precautions--and so escaped. The Germans lost time before
they entered the deserted village, for they feared an ambush. When
they _did_ enter, it was long past sunset and the night was too dark
to do anything before dawn. Even then they had no guide to show them
the track across the marsh, and they were forced to skirt it, losing so
much time that the British battalion--if you can call less than three
hundred men a battalion--got clear away, and in due course picked up
the main body, taking with them Hippolyte and Casper.

You would say, if you did not know human nature, that there was no room
for a legend of celestial intervention. But you would be wrong. Even in
the rescued battalion--long since brought up to strength and upholding
its laurels elsewhere in the line--the story holds good that somewhere
unspecified on the Belgian frontier an angel, mediæval in every detail
down to aureole, wings, and celestial robes, did actually intervene
and rescue it from under the very noses of the baffled Boches. And
this although Hippolyte, adopted child of the regiment, sports his
sergeant-major's uniform for everyone to see, and Casper, brilliantly
caparisoned, stalks as a mascot should behind the drums. Elsewhere the
legend has assumed new details, as I realized when a very excellent
clergyman assured me that it was ... George himself, mounted upon a
white horse (so transmogrified, I take it, was black Casper), who rode
up and down the line before the 2nd Battalion of the West Loamshires,
shaking his sword at the advancing Prussian Guard, who not unnaturally
fled in disorder. Perhaps, in Terbeeke, he has by this time become
Ste. Gudule, or some other patron saint of the Belgians, with a fiery
dragon or whatever be her saintly attributes. I don't know, because, as
I say, I was never in Terbeeke, but here at least you have what really
happened, as Madame Tavernier told it to me in the front room of her
Blanchisserie du Cygne, in the village of Durdegem, and in the presence
of Hippolyte himself, who afterwards begged shamelessly for _sous_.




A HERO TALE OF THE RED CROSS

_Told by G. S. Petroff, War Correspondent of the "Russkoye Slovo,"
Moscow_

  The following incident is narrated in M. Petroff's account of a
  battle on the eastern front. Translated for _Current History_.


I--STORY OF THE WOUNDED GERMAN

One of our soldiers brought with him a German officer, who could hardly
stand on his feet. His leg had been pierced by a bayonet, his shoulder
was bleeding from a bullet, and his arm had been bruised by the butt
end of a rifle. He was losing consciousness from pain and loss of
blood. As soon as the soldier led him to our place he dropped with his
whole weight to the ground. The doctor bandaged him, exclaiming: "What
luck! Three wounds, and in spite of all of them he will be well soon.
The wound in the leg is only a flesh wound, his arm is badly bruised
but not broken, and only his collarbone at his shoulder is broken. In
a month he will be all right again. Just look! what a handsome fellow,
and what expensive underwear!"

The bandaged officer came to himself, looked around the yard, and,
seeing the farmhouse in the background on fire, he sharply seated
himself.

"Now be quiet, calm yourself," said the doctor, speaking in German and
taking the man gently by the shoulders.

"My wife, my wife!" cried the German, tearing himself forward.

"Where is the wife?"

"There, in the house, in the fire!" He made an effort to get off the
stretcher from under the doctor's hands.

"Is he delirious or what?" muttered the doctor in Russian. "There is no
one in the house," he added soothingly in German. "Your German wounded
were there, but they were saved in time."

"But my wife? My wife!" cried the captive in terror.

"What wife? How did she come here?"

"She is a nurse. She was here with the wounded. We loved each other,
we married only a year ago. She became a nurse. Our regiment happened
to be near their hospital. Your offensive was unexpected. There was no
time to remove the hospital. The other nurses left, but she would not
leave when I was so near. Where is she? My wife!"

"Did any one see a German nurse in the house or yard?" asked the
doctor, turning to the Russian soldiers and telling them briefly what
the prisoner had said:

"There was no woman," came the response. "The house was empty. Look at
the fire within. Even mice would have run out by now."

At this moment something metallic shrilled through the air. A heavy
German shell flew over us.

"Scoundrels!" cursed the doctor. "They are firing on us--and their own
wounded! We must get out of this. Two or three more shells and they
will begin dropping in the yard. Carry our wounded first, then theirs.
Hurry, or we shall remain here for eternity!"


II--A WOMAN'S FIGURE AT WINDOW OF BURNING HOUSE

The captive officer, apparently powerless, could not rise from the
stretcher, where he was lying with one of his soldiers who had been
wounded before him. He gazed devouringly at the blazing house. Suddenly
he shouted savagely: "There, at the window, under the roof! Look, she
is breaking the window--where the smoke is pouring out!"

We looked at the roof of the blazing house, and, in truth, there was
a woman's figure in white, with a red cross on her breast. The doctor
shouted: "Eh, fellows, it is true! A woman was left in the house--a
nurse--his wife!"

"What can be done?" asked the stunned soldiers. "The whole house is on
fire, and she is not strong enough to break through the window frame.
She must be weak from fright. But why did she go up? Why not down?"

"There's no use guessing!" shouted a bearded fellow, evidently from the
reserves, throwing off his overcoat.

"Where are you going?" cried the soldiers.

But he was already out of reach of their voices. He rushed into the
house. All were stupefied, fearing to breathe. A minute passed,
another, a third. Then at the window appeared the bearded face of the
Russian soldier. There came the sound of broken glass and wood. Above
our heads something was shrilling, but no one paid attention to the
German shells. The soldier broke the window, dragged the woman into the
open air. She was unconscious.

"Catch!" rang from above, and a big white parcel came down. The
soldiers caught it successfully on the hero's outspread overcoat. Only
one of them was hurt in the eye by the heel of her shoe.

"How will our chap get back to us now?" asked the soldiers of one
another. "It is hell inside."

"Oh, he will get out, all right," said some one. "It is easier to get
out than to get in. He knows the way. And if he burns some of his
beard, no harm; he has a large one."

"Carry her to her husband!" ordered the doctor, "and get out from
here immediately. The Germans are shelling us. Take away the rest, and
don't forget the couple," remarked jokingly the doctor, happy over the
incident. "I will wait for our hero. He may be burned."

The soldiers caught the remaining stretchers, and nearly ran out of the
yard. At that moment a big German shell struck the burning house. A
deafening explosion shook the air. The walls trembled, shook, and fell.
The heroic soldier had not had time to get out. He remained buried
under the ruins.

When the woman recovered consciousness near her wounded husband she
did not understand where she was. She murmured in perplexity: "Dream,
death? Otto, is that you? Are we together in heaven?"

"On earth and both alive," calmed the doctor.

"How did you get to the upper story?" asked the husband.

"I saw Russian soldiers run into the house. I feared violence, so I ran
upstairs. I thought I would run down later, but then came the fire....
A soldier appeared behind me and I was terrified to death."

"But that soldier saved you!" sighed the doctor.

"How? Where is he?"

"In heaven, if there is such a place for heroes." The doctor then told
them all. The German officer and his wife both cried.

"But how was it that your guns were firing at a farm which you were
occupying?" asked the prisoner.

"Our guns?" exclaimed the doctor, who was already bandaging a new
victim. "It was your guns that were shelling a house over which flew
a German Red Cross flag. Our soldiers were saving the lives of your
wounded, and your guns were firing at both ours and yours. They killed
the man who saved you. That's the way the Kaiser makes war."




LIFE STORY OF "GRANDMOTHER OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION"

_Triumphant Return from Forty-four Years in Siberian Exile_

_Told by Catherine Breshkovskaya, the Russian Revolutionist_

  This life story of the "Grandmother of the Revolution," Catherine
  Breshkovskaya, is the living symbol of the Russian people's
  long and hard struggle for freedom. Of her seventy-three years
  forty-four have been spent in prison and Siberian exile. But
  neither the wilderness of Siberia nor the severity of convict labor
  has broken the spirit of this little woman. Entering the struggle
  against Czarism while still in its infancy, she lived to see its
  complete overthrow, and the Russian people remembered their loving
  "Babushka." They made her journey from Siberia to Petrograd after
  the revolution a continuous triumphal procession, such as no Czar
  or King has ever been accorded. Mme. Breshkovskaya, upon her
  arrival home, began touring Russia in the interests of Kerensky's
  policies. Her love for the common people, her influence on the
  peasantry, her faith in the stability of the New Russia, made her
  a great power. She has told the story of her life in the Petrograd
  weekly, "_Niva_," which has been translated by Isaac Don Levine
  for the _New York Tribune_. Here she tells for the first time how
  she journeyed afoot over Russia to preach "freedom from ignorance
  and political tyranny" to the peasants; how she was sentenced to
  Siberia; how she escaped, was captured, reimprisoned and flogged;
  and how on the news of the Czar's downfall she began her journey
  home on a sledge over the snow and ice to join her people in the
  establishment of the republic.


I--"I ALWAYS PITIED THE SERFS"

I was born in 1844. I passed my childhood and youth in the province of
Tchernigoff, and all my life I remained grateful to my parents for the
good and wise training and schooling which they gave me. They pitied
the serfs and never oppressed them. Nevertheless there was a sharp
difference between our life, the life of landlords, and that of the
peasants in their cabins, such a shocking difference that my childish
soul suffered greatly from the contradiction between the reality and
the teaching of Christ. My mother would often read to us the New
Testament and biographies of the great apostles of truth and love for
humanity.

All my life I thought so much and ceaselessly about the needs of the
people, the suffering of the people, that all my sorrows and joys are
bound up with the people. And I always made it my duty to serve the
people and do all that is necessary to open the people's eyes to its
own life and wants.

My own life was entirely composed of love and devotion to my country
and people and of a passionate desire to serve them with all the powers
in my possession up to the very hour of my death.

I am asked: "How did I arrive at the firm resolution to live only for
the people?" I think that this resolution was always present in me,
from my youngest years, from the very beginning of my conscious life.

When I turn back in my mind to review my past life, I see myself,
first of all, a little five-year-old lassie, who suffered at heart for
somebody: for the coachman, or the chambermaid, or the day laborer, or
the oppressed peasants (at that time serfdom still existed in Russia).

The impressions of the people's suffering sank so deeply into my
childish soul that they never deserted me afterward in all my life.

I was seventeen when, in 1861, the peasants were freed of the violence
of the landlords, but were so badly supplied with land that the
laboring masses were again forced to go into slavery to the wealthy.
The agitations among the peasants provoked terrible executions.
Their torture was taking place before my very eyes, strengthening my
aspiration to serve the people with all my might, so as to lighten
their bitter lot.

No revolutionary circles and organizations were known to exist at
that time in the provinces, but there soon came the activity of the
Zemstvos, and I applied to it all my efforts. Ten years I labored
in the peasant school and the village, organizing credit-savings
banks, mutual aid, co-operative shops and campaigns on the eve of the
elections of judges and rural boards. My work was progressing, the
confidence of the peasants in me was helping it along, but against me
and my assistants the nobility arose, reporting us to the ministers,
and the labor of many years was swept away as if with a broom.

The schools and banks were closed, all the honest people of our
county and the whole province of Tchernigoff were placed under police
surveillance, many were exiled to the northern provinces and me they
began to persecute.


II--"I DECIDED TO START A REVOLUTION"

I clearly perceived then that the government of Alexander II introduced
reforms only on paper, only seeking to create the impression that it
desired to better the life of the population. Actually, however, the
government wickedly persecuted every attempt to help the laboring
people to emerge from the darkness into light, to approach knowledge,
to proclaim its own rights.

It was clearly evident, not only in our locality but throughout the
whole of Russia, that the government feared knowledge in the people and
endeavored to keep it in a state of rightless slavery. This compelled
me to seek another path, another way of working in the interest of
my beloved people, and toward the end of the '60s I decided to go to
Russia in search of men with whom to start an illegal struggle, i.e.,
a movement forbidden under the Czar's laws.

For more than two years I wandered about Russia, ever looking for
some revolutionary centre, which could exist only as an underground
organization. Gradually, by changing one kind of work for another,
I penetrated into a rather large organization, which had decided to
get personally in contact with the people, not through books and
proclamations.

At that time the difference between the sea of peasants and the little
lake of intellectuals was so great that they were, entirely ignorant of
one another. Besides, the moujik's suspicion of any person bearing the
appearance of a "gentleman" was so deeply rooted that it was impossible
to carry to the peasant and labor midst any message and retain the
dress of the gentry. It was necessary to change the appearance from
foot to head, to look a perfect plebeian.

I put on a peasant dress, threw a bag across my shoulder, obtained a
stick and set out to tramp. Although I did not tramp the country long,
only one summer, yet I succeeded in visiting many villages, and nowhere
did I meet with distrust. The peasants eagerly listened to my talks and
those of my comrades. We told them that the land ought not belong to
the few; that it should be placed in possession of all the people, of
all those who wish to toil on it; that there ought not be such a system
which permits the selling, mortgaging, buying and renting of thousands
of acres by a few hands, while people were starving nearby because they
lacked the land from which to obtain bread. The peasants would agree
with us and also say that the land ought to belong to those who labor
on it, who till it.

We would also tell them that the landlords were oppressing the people;
that they had seized all the government in their hands; that the
bureaucracy was fraternizing with the landlords, hindering the people
from living a free life. In this the peasants would also agree with us.

We had difficulty only talking about one subject, the Czar. We tried to
explain to the peasants that the Czar was acting concertedly with the
nobility and bureaucracy, that he it was who was the chief oppressor of
the people. But the peasants would not want to believe it. They were so
distant in those days from understanding state affairs, being unable to
read, because of general illiteracy, and lacking fundamental knowledge,
that they had no idea how much evil the Czarist form of government had
done to the nation.

The peasants trusted the Czar; they were convinced that the Czar was
a kind master of Russia who had to maintain an army to defend her
from enemies, and that the peasants had to till the land, pay taxes,
for the maintenance of the army. They thought that the Czar loved his
people and took care of them, and, if officials did oppress the people
sometimes, it was due to the fact that they deceived the Czar. And if
the Czar were only to learn the whole truth he would drive out the
officials and again become a loving father to his people.


III--"I TOLD THE PEASANTS THE TRUTH ABOUT THE CZAR"

Such were the beliefs of the peasants about the Czar. In spite of it
all, I continued to tell them the real truth about the Czar, explaining
to them that the Czar knows of all the oppressions and is in charge
of every one of the oppressors. The peasants would say that I was
mistaken, but, nevertheless, listened to my arguments, and not one of
them insulted me with vulgar language.

I was not alone in the tramp from village to village. Three thousand
youths went to the people at that time, spreading all over the
thirty-six provinces of Russia, and we all talked to the people on the
same subject; we all endeavored to arouse the people to a good, free
life. However, the government soon discovered our activities and began
to arrest many, imprisoning, exiling to hard-labor settlements and to
Siberia.

I was arrested entirely by accident in 1874. I was "covering" the
provinces of Kieff, Podolia, Tchernigoff and Kherson, and had in my bag
detailed maps of these localities, in order to know my way and avoid
arousing suspicion by questions. Whenever I stopped in the village
cabins no peasant would ever look into my bag, and thus no one could
ever find out who I was.

But once, while stopping in Tulchin, the Province of Podolia, the
woman-laborer of the peasant who gave shelter to me looked into my bag
and discovered the maps there. To an illiterate person every printed
word was a rarity, especially in those days. It will be understood, of
course, that the laborer was shocked by her discovery. The same day she
went to do some gardening for the sheriff and told him everything. The
sheriff became alarmed and hurried off to look for me.

And I, without suspecting anything, was at the time returning from the
market, where I purchased a couple of apples, some pork and bread.

Suddenly I saw the sheriff racing toward me in a carriage, shouting:
"Get into the carriage!"

Well, I understood immediately what the trouble was. I got into the
carriage and kept still.

We arrived at the cabin. "Where is the luggage of this woman?" The
peasant replied: "She has no luggage, but she has a bag."

The bag was examined and what could they find in it but maps and
proclamations? Clearly, my case was closed.

The sheriff was rather inexperienced, simple-minded, so he unfolded the
proclamations and started to read them aloud, before the whole crowd.
The peasants, after listening to them, said:

"These are the real words. The whole truth is written there. This is
the very truth which the nobles have hidden from us."

In the meantime the examining officer arrived, and there both of
them began to read the proclamation aloud. Meanwhile a multitude of
peasants gathered, listening even under the windows. They learned
my proclamation by heart. The county police chief was notified. He
arrived, immediately perceived the meaning of it all, and ordered me to
prison.


IV--"I WAS HANDCUFFED AND LOCKED IN A DARK CELL"

In those days a woman propagandist was something unheard of and unseen.
In fear of this new phenomenon the warden of the Bratzlau jail thought
it necessary to incarcerate me immediately in a dark cell and handcuff
me. A month passed in wandering about country prisons, till gendarmes
came, took me away from the police and dragged me first to a Kieff
jail, then to Moscow, and finally to Petrograd, where I was tried with
other offenders after being kept in prison for four years in solitary
confinement. The condition of the imprisonment was serious. Of the
300 prisoners held for total only 193 survived, among whom there were
37 women. During all of my imprisonment I made no explanation to the
judicial authorities, and I was condemned to five years of convict
labor. But it was not dreadful. Nothing was dreadful when one had faith
in one's righteousness.

My healthy organism and ripe age helped me endure the many years'
torments at a time when the young, tender lives fell sick quickly and
were carried off one after another by death, leaving a feeling of
atrocious pain and indelible bitterness.

But we all retained our eagerness for activity, so early interrupted by
an evil hand. The thought of returning to the party, to revolutionary
work, lived in our minds in the form of a red-hot nail, and aroused all
our abilities, all our power to seek a means to escape. There, to the
fighters, to the bright populists, our spiritual vision was directed.

I was already in on the rights of a settler, beyond the Baikal, in
Barguzin, when, together with three men comrades, I moved into the
hilly taiga, with its thousands of impediments and dangers. Our daring
escape, which ended in our capture while wandering about unfathomed
abysses and rocks, has been described by Tiutchev. I, as a former
hard-labor criminal, was condemned to four years more of penal
servitude and forty whips, which, however, the authorities did not dare
to apply, "in order to arouse against the administration the political
exiles," as the Military Governor of the Outer Baikal said in his
report.

I was thus forced to go, in 1882, after another year of imprisonment,
to the same old Kara mines, at that time full of prisons for convicts
and politicals. Both the first and the second perished there of
scurvy, typhus, endless tuberculosis, but mostly the convicts, as the
officials disregarded them entirely and kept them in the most shameful
conditions.

My second arrival at Kara was for me rather a joyous occasion. When
I first came there I was the only woman doing hard labor; it was not
fashionable yet to send women to mines. But now I found already sixteen
or eighteen feminine comrades, and all of my second term I passed
in the best society in the world. The annual term of convict labor
consisted of eight months and my term flew past me unnoticed. Only one
thing was aggravating, and that was to see how the frailer among us in
health gradually sank and surely neared their graves, in the blossom of
their lives.


V--"I LANGUISHED FOR EIGHT YEARS IN A DEAD CITY"

In 1885 I was again sent on the rights of a settler beyond the Baikal,
in the dead city of Selenginsk, where I spent eight of the most sad
years of my life. The naked steppe, the nailed-up cabins and the
tireless trailing of the police became my lot. I was given neither
the rights of a peasant nor a passport for travel in Siberia. And the
heart burned with a passionate desire to escape, to renew the struggle
with the enraged foe and take revenge for the innocently destroyed
powers for good--the daughters and sons of our motherland. I sought,
attempted, fought against obstacles, but all in vain. The steppe beyond
the Baikal, the moundless Mongolian steppe, and, on the north, the
inaccessible Baikal were the severe allies of the guard with which the
authorities had surrounded me. There was no railroad nor steamship
connection with the outside world. Right there then, in lifeless
Selenginsk, I languished for eight whole years, languished like a hawk
in a cage. All alone, ever yearning, I would go out into the steppe and
in a loud voice pour my tempestuous heart, longing for freedom, into
space.

There was not a day on which I did not think of escaping, and I
was always ready for any risk and peril, clinging to the littlest
possibility to get away, but all in vain. No one, absolutely no one,
promised any help. All those in whom it was possible to confide
considered any attempt to escape foredoomed. My soul ached. And only
the thought of my comrades--convicts who were sent to the Yakutsk huts,
only the thought of their suffering made me forget my own. The eight
empty years of my life in Selenginsk have remained all through my life
a gray void, eating up the warm feelings of a warm heart. I filled
my time with work, so as to be able to send my earnings to the dark
prisons, snowbound wastes, to the hungry, forgotten comrades. I read,
studied, in order to know how mankind lived, and how far or near was
the possibility of transforming it into that "intelligent being" with
whom it would be joyful to live. "Have patience," I would tell myself
in the moments of keen grief; "be patient, endure to the end; you will
get what you are waiting for."

In 1890, after living for four years on the rights of a peasant, I
finally received a passport to travel all over Siberia, and on the
same day I departed from the suffocating place so as to gradually
approach the boundary of European Russia as my term was nearing its
end. My health was much undermined by the severe trials I had undergone
in solitariness. Anæmia and strong neuralgia had tormented me in
Selenginsk. But the inherited vigor of the organism soon returned to
me, and the last four years of my life in Siberia, spent in journeying
from town to town, I succeeded in having many conversations with young
and mature people--succeeded in making allies of some of the leading
citizens of Siberia. And when in September, 1896, I returned to Russia
I found there many students of both sexes whom I taught in Siberia the
theories and the urgency of regenerating the old watchwords. They soon
tackled the work of liberation, and many of them remain loyal to this
date to our principles.


VI--"WHEN I CAME BACK FROM SIBERIA"

Again I arrived in Russia in September. But upon my arrival I
encountered a new movement, which was rapidly conquering a place for
itself. Marxism was taking hold of, capturing, the minds of the youth,
and the old fighters were regarded as dead forces. But faith in the
force of personality, faith in the healthy strength of the people, a
knowledge of their aims and needs lent so much firm confidence to my
energy that, without hesitating a moment, I began to do some practical
work, which had ripened in my mind as long before as the celebrated
trial, in 1878, when I declared to my judges that "I have the honor
of belonging to the Russian socialistic and revolutionary party, and
consequently do not recognize the authority of the Czar's courts over
me."

Eighteen years passed after that, and my adherence to the party of
socialism and revolutionism lived in me as freshly and ardently as in
the days of my arrest and trial. Confidence that the peasant masses,
these pillars of the state government, will obey the voice of their
friends and will not be slow to follow their leaders--this confidence
urged me to hasten the consolidation of the various forces likely to
join the Social Revolutionary party, as it has been christened from its
very beginning.

It is necessary to bear in mind that from Siberia I came back to
Russia all alone. I did not even have the addresses of the old comrades
who remained in safety in the gloomy folds of Alexander III's reign.
And it took considerable time, care and patience before my tireless
but modest little journeys about Russia netted definite results as
to acquaintance with people and opportunities. The readiness of the
peasants to join the party became ever clearer, and on the fourth year
of endeavor the party loudly proclaimed its existence, and in the
fifth year all the separate committees recognized one centre. Both the
increase in membership and growth in activity attracted the savage
attention of the Czar's government.

In 1903 the party suffered an enormous wreck. Wholesale arrests and
searches robbed it of many of its leading workers, of its best printing
shops and stores of literature. It was necessary to replace all that.
By this time the work of the party had developed and grown strong
abroad, thanks to our talented and zealous emigrants, who bent all
their energies for the publication of party organs and popular books
and pamphlets.

In order to recall this youth to immediate activities at home,
in Russia, I went abroad for the first time. In May, 1903, I
boarded a steamer in Odessa and accompanied by an experienced
contrabandist-intellectual, went, by way of Rumania, Hungary and Vienna
to Geneva, Switzerland, where there centred the group of the party
workers who were scattered in Paris, London and Switzerland. At this
conference we were fully joined by the old fighters of the past '70s,
Shishko, Volkhovskoy, Lazaroff, Tchaikovsky.

The youth, which frequented all our lectures and debates, listened
attentively to the voices of our speakers. Victor Tchernoff, the
editor-in-chief of our central organs (and Minister of Agriculture
in Kerensky's first Cabinet), victoriously defended the position of
the party against the attacks of our opponents. At the same time
I persistently spoke of the necessity to tackle the real task, to
propagate our ideas among the peasants and workmen, to organize all the
forces capable of and ready to enter into a battle with the old régime,
ready to sacrifice their lives for a free Russia. And thus it was that
a stream of young people of both sexes began to flow back to Russia,
carrying with them Social Revolutionary literature, and the booklets
"In Battle Shalt Thou Obtain Thy Rights" were lavishly spread on all
the roads of the Fatherland.


VII--"I VISITED AMERICA--MY FRIENDS OF FREEDOM"

This task, the labor, of directing the forces of young Russia occupied
two whole years of my life. It is true I succeeded in the meantime
in visiting America, where I was urgently called by the friends of
freedom. I sent out from there considerable sums of money to cover the
expenses of the organization, mainly for literature, the import of
which into Russia was very expensive. In the United States I acquired
many genuine friends, who have remained faithful to me ever since. They
proved it by profuse attention to all my needs during the last years of
my exile and imprisonment, and from 1907 to 1917 they never ceased even
for a week to take care of me.

When the blows of the open struggle of 1905 had reached me I again
crossed the boundary into my country, but this time I passed it on
foot, running across in the company of two "contrabandists" and a
comrade who carried with him a supply of dynamite.

That was the Russian revolution marching, challenging all Russia to an
unequal combat.

Everybody knows the events of 1905, 1906 and 1907. The efforts of the
revolutionists of all parties were unable to withstand the physical
force of the evil government, but they have not only shaken up the
paralyzed mind of the great people, but enticed them into demonstrating
their power and seeing themselves as a victor, though temporarily. The
combat was already nearing its end; the banners were already lowered
and hidden for the next spiritual and physical upheaval; already the
executioners were hanging and slaughtering, shooting and torturing the
best champions of freedom; but my spirit was yet far from submission,
my heart was still heaving with hope, and with head forward I threw
myself into the thick of events. After the wreck of the second Duma I
anticipated a new outburst of indignation on the part of the people.
But apparently the cup of doubts had not yet been exhausted, and the
people ponderingly looked into the future, not risking to sacrifice
their remaining feeble forces.


VIII--"THE HANGMAN'S ROPE WAS AT MY THROAT"

It was in the days of such oppression on one side and vain strainings
of all energies, on the other that I was arrested in Samara in 1907,
again in the month of September.

It seemed to me that this time I would be unable to escape alive
from the hands of the hangmen. This was what I thought. But I felt
otherwise. Two years and nine months I was kept in the fortress of
Peter and Paul, thinking not of that, but of the time when Russia,
after the inevitable victorious and triumphant second revolution, would
take up the work of construction and transform our powerless country,
our almost illiterate people, into an exemplary state, which could
serve as a model to other peoples in culture as well as in social
reform.

Faith in the possibility of seeing my country free, my people
developing in material and spiritual plenty, gave me strength, exalted
my powers. I found myself still able to work with the people and for
the people and was grieved to waste time in exile, in the listlessness
of the Siberian taiga. I again made preparations for an escape, aiming
to join my party comrades, who called me, in revolutionary activity.
And again my escape failed. Only two or three hours separated me from
my goal from a sure shelter and it was painful to fall again into the
hands of the enemy after a thousand miles' journey in the winter.

The thought occurred to me again that they would not pardon me my
attempts to escape, my efforts to identify myself again with the
revolutionary movement. At the same time there pulsed so much life in
my heart that I could not imagine the end of my activities. Neither the
long terms passed in jail nor my exile in Yakutsk had dimmed my spirit.
"I will live through all this," said an inner voice to me; "I will live
through everything and live to see the bright days of freedom." From
Yakutsk I was brought to Irkutsk, and my life here was filled with the
same persecutions as my exile in Kirensk. I fell very ill and observed
how the physicians carefully concealed from me the danger of my malady.
It seemed so strange to me that people could think of my fatal end when
my soul was full of complete faith that time was bringing me nearer
daily to a different kind of end, the triumph of the revolution.

The longer the war continued the more horrible its consequences grew,
the clearer the rascality of the government manifested itself, the more
patent appeared the inevitableness of the rise of democracy all over
the world, the nearer advanced also our revolution.

I waited for the sound of the bell announcing freedom, and wondered
why this sound was tardy in making itself heard. When in November of
last year explosions of indignation followed one another, when irate
calls were exchanged among the several groups of the population, I was
already planted with one foot in the Siberian sleigh, feeling sorry
only that the snow road was beginning to melt.

The 17th of March a telegram reached me in Minusinsk announcing
freedom. The same day I was on my way to Atchinsk, the nearest
railroad station. From Atchinsk on began my uninterrupted communion
with soldiers, peasants, workmen, railroad employees, students and
multitudes of beloved women, who to-day all bear the burdens of the
normal and now also abnormal life of a great state.




TALE OF AN AMAZING VOYAGE

_German Officers Escape from Spain in a Sailing Vessel_

_Told by Frederic Lees_

  The Spanish Premier, Count Romanones, recently stated that the
  sensational story of the escape from Spain in a sailing vessel of
  a number of interned German officers, as briefly reported in _El
  Liberal_, of Madrid, is officially confirmed. With extraordinary
  assurance, the fugitives set out to sail right round the coast of
  Great Britain and reach a Belgian port, but the elements and the
  British Navy intervened, and the audacious scheme miscarried. The
  author's private sources of information have enabled him to throw
  light on a number of episodes which, in the Spanish and German
  newspapers, were intentionally left obscure. Related in the _Wide
  World Magazine_.


I--AT OFFICE OF GERMAN VICE-CONSUL IN SPANISH PORT

One sunny morning in July, 1916, the German Vice-consul of Vigo was
sitting in his office opposite the wharves of the little Spanish
port. The voluminous contents of his mail-bag lay before him, and
at the moment in question his eyes were intently fixed on a long,
official-looking document--a type-written folio sheet bearing a list of
names, preceded by a memorandum. As he read on, his expression became
more and more serious. Twice he read the document through, pondering
awhile over one of the names. Then he hastily pressed the electric-bell
button on his desk.

The Vice-Consul's clerk, Hermann Fischer, appeared instantly, note-book
and pencil in hand.

"It's too soon yet for the correspondence, Fischer," said the
Vice-Consul, "but I've got here a list of those eleven officers who
were arrested the other day, and who are interned at Pampeluna. I want
you to fetch the Navy List and look up one of the names--Lieutenant
Karl Koch. It looks familiar to me."

Fischer was back in a trice with the desired volume, and, having hunted
out the right man from a multitude of Kochs, proceeded to read forth
the biographical information to the attentive Vice-Consul: "Karl Koch,
born 1873, at Düsseldorf; educated Frankfort and Heidelberg; joined the
Imperial Navy 1890; U-boat lieutenant 1914."

"That'll do!" interjected the official. "I thought it must be the same
man. He and I were at Heidelberg together. Dear old Karl! To think
it has fallen to my lot to do him a good turn! As a matter of fact,
Fischer, we've got to see that Koch and certain others are made as
comfortable as possible during their captivity amongst these blessed
Spaniards. And if there's a chance of doing something more than
that--well, all the better. On that point I've got an answer to this
official communication to dictate to you. Perhaps, as you're here,
you'd better take it down at once; then you can code it and get it on
the wires for the Embassy at Madrid without delay."

Whereupon the Vice-Consul of Vigo proceeded to dictate his secret
message, which showed how very wide his consular duties had become in
wartime--duties such as only Teutonic diplomatic agents are expected to
carry out.

Some people, in relating the part the Vice-Consul played in the
adventure in which Lieutenant Karl Koch and his companions became
involved, contend that it was this officer who was the prime mover;
that it was he who got into touch with the Vice-Consul, who promised
all possible support. But I have reason to believe it was the other
way about, and that the _deus ex machina_ of the whole affair--from
the very moment that the German Vice-Consulate received official
information anent Koch's arrest and internment to the purchase of the
_Virgen del Socorro_ and her departure on her perilous Odyssey--was the
Vice-Consul, whose fortuitous acquaintanceship with the lieutenant of
the submarine (captured and interned in circumstances which need not
here be dwelt upon) redoubled his official zeal. If that is not so,
what of the indiscretions of his clerk Hermann Fischer? What of those
of the intermediaries through whom the Vice-Consul got possession of
the _Virgen del Socorro_? What of the convincing evidence of the hotel
and lodging-house keepers of Vigo who, all unknowingly, harbored the
fugitives? What of the incriminating documents in the Vice-Consul's own
handwriting, or that of his clerk, which I am assured came into the
possession of the Spanish authorities?


II--SECRET MESSAGE TO GERMAN EMBASSY IN MADRID

But I will not anticipate events any further. Enough has been said
to enable me to take up the thread of my narrative from the time the
Vice-Consul dispatched his coded message regarding Lieutenant Karl Koch
to the German Embassy in Madrid.

Having signed his despatch and given Fischer sufficient work to keep
him busy until noon, the Vice-Consul sallied forth with a satisfied
mien and walked leisurely, almost aimlessly, towards the quays, gazing
out occasionally over the bay. In the distance could be seen two
German vessels, interned since the beginning of the war, one of which
was the steamship _Wehrt_. At last, on reaching the deserted end of
one of the quays, the Vice-Consul, glancing quickly over his shoulder,
stopped and gave a low whistle, which was answered almost immediately
by a similar signal and the sound of a boat grating against the side of
the quay.

"_Ach so!_ There you are, José," said the official, as the boatman
became visible. "I was afraid you would be late. You can row me this
morning to the _Wehrt_."

And with a final precautionary look to right and left, the German
Vice-Consul disappeared over the side and clambered down the iron rungs
of a ladder into the boat.

The captain of the steamship _Wehrt_, condemned to a captivity which
eternally rankled in his breast, was always ready to extend a hearty
welcome to the Vice-Consul of Vigo. Their periodic meetings, arranged
as far as possible in secret, constituted a safety valve. The captain
could fulminate to his heart's content against the tyrant of the
seas--Great Britain; the Vice-Consul could give full rein to his taste
for intrigue.

Behold these two, then, _tête-à-tête_ in the captain's private room,
and exchanging confidences over the luncheon table. The captain,
deprived of official information for the past three or four days,
was thirsting for news regarding fresh developments in the war, and
his lean, bronzed face lit up with eagerness when he inquired if the
Vice-Consul had anything new and special to report.

"_Ya wohl!_ Something of the greatest importance," replied the
official. "A matter for consultation, and in which your advice will be
valuable."

And the Vice-Consul proceeded to put the skipper _au courant_ with the
bare facts concerning the predicament in which Lieutenant Koch and his
companions found themselves at Pampeluna, the official request for
whatever assistance he could render them, the strange coincidence of
Koch and himself being old college chums, and so on.


III--THE CONSPIRACY IN THE CAPTAIN'S CABIN

"It's very evident, captain, that we must do something for them,"
continued the Vice-Consul. "Pampeluna is a long way from Vigo, but I
think something can be done if we put our heads together. I can't read
all that's in the official mind which inspired that memorandum, but
it's quite clear the authorities regard Vigo as the most convenient
open door for Koch and his ten brother-officers. An open door, provided
it is _held_ open for them. The question is, how are we going to do
that? I can see a way of solving part of the difficulty. You can leave
the Pampeluna portion to me. There are plenty of ways of opening prison
doors in a country like this. As a landsman, I am convinced I can open
the land door without much trouble, but it requires a sailor like you
to attend to the sea door. That's way I've come to you."

"And you couldn't have come to a more willing man," replied the
captain, emphatically. "Try and realize what I've had to suffer on
this infernal ship during the last twenty-three months, with the eyes
of the authorities continually on me and the _Wehrt_, and every little
jack-in-office sniffing around at unexpected moments, and you'll
understand how I feel for your friend and his companions. Yes, we've
got to do what we can for them. The submarine is the only effectual
weapon left to Germany, so if we succeed in returning to her eleven
of her brave U-boat men we shall truly have done good patriotic work.
Now, at the back of my brain I've got a plan. You're welcome to it.
You know, I suppose, that the _Virgen del Socorro_ is for sale? She's
as tight a little schooner as ever left the port of Vigo. I've often
admired her lines and speed as she sailed past the _Wehrt_. Now, when
this war is over and we've reduced everybody's tonnage, save our
own, to a minimum, the _Virgen del Socorro_ will be worth her weight
in gold. At the price she is going at to-day the boat is a splendid
speculation. Why don't you buy her? You'd find it worth your while, I
think, to be the sleeping partner."

"Not at all a bad idea, captain. But are you certain the _Virgen del
Socorro_ is in the market? I thought it was owned by the brothers
Z----, who have always looked upon the schooner as a sort of child of
theirs."

"That is so. But ties of the closest affection have to be broken in
these troubled times, and the brothers Z---- have decided to dissolve
partnership. I dare say your boatman José, who ought to be well up in
harbor gossip, will be able to tell you all about that. There's no
doubt my information is correct. I can even tell you the exact figure
at which the owners are willing to sell--eleven thousand five hundred
pesetas."

"Dirt cheap, considering the times," said the Vice-Consul,
thoughtfully. He took an extra long pull at his beer tankard, and then,
bringing the blue earthenware vessel down on the table with a bang,
exclaimed, "By Jove, captain, you've put me on the right track! I'm
beginning to see the way to do it. Listen!"

The plan unfolded was as follows. Using his boatman as an
intermediary--José was generally believed to be fairly well-to-do--he
would enter into negotiations with the brothers Z---- for the purchase
of the _Virgen del Socorro_. One of the conditions of the agreement
would be particularly tempting to the owners. On the understanding that
the purchase was kept secret--the rumor might indeed be set afloat
that the brothers had decided not to part with their dearly-beloved
boat--they should be allowed to retain possession until the very last
moment before the schooner was required by the new proprietors. There
was evidently a double advantage in this: it would allay any suspicions
which inquisitive harbor authorities or other officials might have
whilst preparations were being made on board the _Virgen del Socorro_
for the reception of the fugitives from Pampeluna, and it would enable
the Vice-Consul, the captain, and other helpers to carry out those
preparations at their leisure. No one could say how long it would
take them to prepare the road to the "open door" of Vigo. Though the
Vice-Consul's secret service fund was still well supplied, it was no
good to minimize the difficulties, which were greater than the captain
of the _Wehrt_ could possibly comprehend until he had explained the
full extent of his plan.

The _Virgen del Socorro_ was to be sent right round the British Isles,
in order to descend the North Sea unobserved, and, flying the Dutch
flag, reach a Belgian port. It was a risky plan, but, the British Navy
notwithstanding, the conspirators thought it had possibilities of
success. The Vice-Consul, in assisting the scheme, proposed to make the
Fatherland a present of more than the eleven officers at Pampeluna.

It was advisable to get as many able-bodied German subjects on board as
possible, and so he planned to include in the party of fugitives nine
others, including four officers from the _Goeben_, a naval doctor, a
law student, and two sailors, none of whom was interned, in addition to
a sergeant interned at Alcala de Henares, seventeen miles north-east of
Madrid. Twenty was certainly a large crew for a schooner of the _Virgen
del Socorro's_ size, but the voyage was to be undertaken during the
summer--and an exceptionally fine summer, too--so the risk of a mishap,
provided there was good seamanship, was slight. As this question of
weather was important, the Vice-Consul proposed to see to the purchase
of the vessel without delay, and to communicate at once with Lieutenant
Koch.


IV--SECRET PURCHASE OF SHIP--TO ESCAPE

Within the next few days the secret purchase by the Vice-Consul of
Vigo of the _Virgen del Socorro_ was an accomplished fact, and he had
had his first interview at Pampeluna with his old friend, Lieutenant
Koch. Other meetings followed, at intervals of a week or so, and
before the end of the month, thanks to a lavish "greasing" of palms,
the arrangements for the escape of the eleven officers and their
concentration with other fugitives at Vigo were all made. The captain
of the _Wehrt_, as surreptitiously as possible, bought inordinate
quantities of provisions and stores during July, in order that José and
the others might, at the opportune moment, tranship a part of them to
the _Virgen del Socorro_.

At last everything was ready. Nothing remained to be done but for
someone to send a signal from Pampeluna to the Vice-Consul at Vigo, who
was to pass it on to other quarters. But the signal, so eagerly awaited
on the appointed day, August 4th, never came!

Instead, two days later came a letter of explanation, stating that
Lieutenant Karl Koch had fallen ill at the critical moment. The plan
of escape, therefore, had to be indefinitely postponed. It was a
bitter disappointment to the Vice-Consul, who pictured himself being
reproached by his superiors for building castles in the air, if not
being saddled with the whole of the expenses. But he consoled himself,
in the presence of the captain of the _Wehrt_, with the argument that
it was "just as well, since it would allow the authorities time to go
to sleep." The astute seaman could not, however, quite agree with this.
He knew the advantage of fine weather for such a perilous voyage as the
one projected, and feared that if the escape were not effected soon it
might be too late or too full of risk to be worth undertaking.

Lieutenant Koch's illness dragged on for week after week. August went
by, September came, and the hopes of the Vice-Consul of Vigo fell lower
and lower. In the first three weeks in September the officer entered
the convalescent stage. One result of his breakdown was, indeed, in
his favor; he was allowed greater and greater liberty, and, on the
plea of taking the air, got out several times in a motor-car, with the
authorization of the governor and doctor of the prison and under the
discreet eye of an official. Soon even this supervision was relaxed,
and then, when October came in, the U-boat lieutenant saw the chance
for which he and his companions had been waiting. It was about this
time that the Vice-Consul of Vigo (now almost on the verge of despair)
unexpectedly received the long-awaited warning.


V--PLOT LAID FOR THE FLIGHT

On the morning of October 5th, Lieutenant Koch and his companions,
having obtained a pass for an unofficial "joy ride" in two motor-cars,
set out for a little country village some twenty miles from Pampeluna.
As they were all on parole and the chauffeurs of the hired cars were
connected with the police, permission was given to the party to remain
at their destination for luncheon. It was understood, however, that
as soon as the meal was over the return journey should be made, so as
to be back well before the day was declining. Koch and his friends,
through intermediaries introduced to him by the Vice-Consul of Vigo,
laid their plans very cleverly. Just outside the village is a rustic
inn where excellent luncheons are served. The dining-room looks out, at
the back of the house, on to a garden with a bowling-alley and arbor,
and this garden adjoins meadows, bordered by the railway line. Not far
away is the little country railway station. What happened can easily be
imagined.

The eleven officers had their luncheon served in the restaurant proper;
the chauffeurs were served in a smaller room adjoining, looking out on
to the front and the road. The landlord had been instructed (and had
been well paid in advance for this and other little services) to ply
these two worthy fellows with as much liquor as they could hold, with
the result that they were deep in their cups long before the boisterous
officers had got through their coffee and liqueurs. They were in such
an advanced state of intoxication, indeed, that they took no heed when
a singular silence followed the noise of voices and laughter in the
adjoining room; and it was not until the appointed hour for departure
had long since passed that they recovered their senses sufficiently to
learn the truth. Their erstwhile "joy riders" had flown! They might
have been seen, fully three-quarters of an hour before, strolling
down the garden and making their way, as unobstrusively as possible,
across the fields to the countryside railway station, where, provided
beforehand with tickets for different stations on the line to Vigo,
they boarded the train, once more in as nonchalant a manner as possible
in groups of twos and threes, in different carriages. By the time the
chauffeurs came to their senses and realized they had been fooled, the
fugitives were well out of danger and, having got together again at
the first big stopping-place, had put themselves _en règle_ as regards
through tickets for their common destination, to which they continued
to travel, however, separately, in order to minimize the risks of
capture. The outwitted chauffeurs had another unpleasant surprise on
rushing to their cars, with the object of dashing back to Pampeluna and
recounting to the authorities their sorry tale of misadventure. Though
they cranked their machines like madmen, the motors stubbornly refused
to work. The reason soon became evident: the sparking-plugs had been
removed by the far-seeing Koch.

Meanwhile, on October 2nd, the interned Sergeant Dietrich Gratschuss
had slipped away from Alcala. His escape, facilitated by the four
uninterned officers from the _Goeben_, who provided him with a suit
of civilian clothes, thrown over a wall into the prison-garden where
he worked daily, was made doubly sure by certain judicious bribes to
a sentry, who kept his back turned and eyes averted at the critical
moment. Gratschuss slipped into his disguise in a tool-shed, and calmly
walked out of the prison-yard--saluted by the unsuspecting man on
guard--as though he had been a visitor. His friends were waiting round
the corner for him with a hundred horsepower motor-car, in which, with
the other uninterned Germans (the naval doctor, the law student, and
the two sailors), he was whirled away at sixty miles an hour. The whole
of the journey to Vigo was made in this powerful car, which the owners
had been able to provide with an amply supply of petrol and food for a
long and rapid flight, lasting well into the night.

The whole of the machinery of the Vice-Consul of Vigo was now in
motion. All the fugitives reached that port in safety and scattered
themselves over hotels and lodging-houses.

A hue and cry was, of course, set up from Pampeluna and Alcala de
Henares; but the Spanish police went off on various wrong tracks before
they thought of ordering a watch to be set at all the ports. Even
when this tardy step was taken, no one ever suspected--so well had the
Vice-Consul and his accomplices laid their plans--that Vigo was the
port from which the escape was to be effected.


VI--MIDNIGHT--THE FUGITIVES BOARD THE SHIP

On October 6th the _Virgen del Socorro_, to allay any suspicion, made a
voyage to sea, and, on returning, moored alongside the _Wehrt_. Then,
one pitch-black night, the fugitives left their hiding-places. One by
one they slipped out into the darkness and, following the narrowest
and most deserted streets leading to the harbor, reached the quays
unobserved. At such an hour of the night--it was getting on for eleven
o'clock--they could be fairly certain of meeting no one, save, perhaps,
a drunken sailor or two. These revellers took no more notice of Koch
and his companions than they did of their own dim shadows. One by one,
under cover of the darkness, the fugitives disappeared down the same
iron ladder the Vice-Consul had used so often, into José's boat.

By midnight all the fugitives were on board the _Wehrt_, from whose
well-replenished store-rooms they immediately began transhipping the
provisions to the _Virgen del Socorro_. All through the night and until
2 A.M. this work continued. The _Virgen del Socorro_ was then
towed out a little farther into the bay, and on the first signs of
daylight appearing her bow was turned north-east. Soon afterwards a
fresh early morning wind sprang up from the land, her sails filled, and
she set off on her long voyage.

What happened to the _Virgen del Socorro_ I will now relate, in
accordance with details furnished by various members of her crew.

The little vessel had no sooner left Vigo and got out into the open
than the land wind suddenly increased in strength and drove her into
exceedingly rough and treacherous water. Some of the crew were for
turning back, despite the risks that step would have entailed, and the
matter was discussed at some length by Lieutenant Koch and the other
leaders. They came to the conclusion, however, that they were "between
the devil and the deep sea," and must keep on. It seems doubtful,
indeed, whether, had they decided to make an attempt to get back to
Vigo, they could have accomplished it.

That first day, and for many days afterwards, the _Virgen del Socorro_
became a veritable plaything of the waves, which soon began to rise
mountain-high. The sufferings of the crowded fugitives in this terrible
weather were intense. All were drenched to the skin, and for more than
three days and nights they had to remain in this miserable condition.
To these tortures were added the craving for sleep and adequate
nourishment, for, amidst the continual buffeting of the waves and
wind, they could neither sleep nor get anything cooked. Under these
conditions, it was not surprising that the twenty occupants of the
_Virgen del Socorro_ were finally reduced to the state of not caring
what happened. One of the two sailors on board, on whose shoulders
devolved much of the work of navigation, said that, "old seaman though
he was, he had never before experienced such weather." He felt at times
that "all his strength and hope were sapped," and hourly, during those
terrible first six days, when the little schooner was tossed about like
a cork, "expected death would relieve him of his tortures."

The storm then calmed down a little and gave the fugitives a respite.
They were able to dry their drenched clothes and attend to the needs of
the inner man. At the same time they could pay more attention to the
question of their course. On this score they were soon to receive a
shock, for there hove in sight a vessel that was undoubtedly a British
patrol. For a couple of hours there were many anxious searchings of
heart on board the _Virgen del Socorro_. Would she, thanks to her
insignificance and the Dutch flag flying from her mast, be taken for an
inoffensive fishing smack, and be allowed to go unchallenged? That had
been part of their plan all through.

At one moment it looked as though the patrol was bearing down upon
them at full speed; but when the dreaded vessel got no bigger, but
instead gradually receded into the distance, the crew of the _Virgen
del Socorro_ realized that for the time being they were safe.


VII--FOILED BY A STORM--THE CAPTURE

Safe from the clutches of their human enemies, perhaps, but by no means
safe from the angry sea. Had some of the crew been able to foresee what
was in store for them, they would perhaps have welcomed the arrival of
that British patrol with outspread arms and expressions of joy. Once
more they were caught up in the embrace of a furious storm, and driven
helplessly westward, expecting every moment to be their last.

On October 24th another brief calm set in, enabling the navigator to
ascertain his position. The little vessel was found to be some distance
west of Bantry, on the south coast of Ireland. Here the storm again
increased in violence, and once more the ill-fated _Virgen del Socorro_
seemed likely to founder. A consultation was held by Koch and the
other leaders. They came to the conclusion that it would be madness
to attempt to continue with the original plan. In such seas as were
running, they would run the risk of being shipwrecked a hundred times
before they got halfway round the British Isles. The only thing to
be done, if they were to prevent the _Virgen del Socorro_ from being
smashed to matchwood on the British coast, was to keep as much as
possible in the open sea and steer for the English channel, in hope of
making the Belgian or Dutch coast unobserved.

Six more terrible days followed. By this time more than half the crew
of the _Virgen del Socorro_ were in a parlous condition. Their store of
provisions had shrunk to such an extent that everybody had to be placed
on rations, and the fresh water had dwindled so alarmingly that it was
reserved for those who were actually on the point of collapse. Several
of the crew, through the cold and constant seasickness, were utterly
helpless.

It was about this time that the coast of Cornwall came into view, and
on November 4th the crew found themselves in sight of Lundy Island,
at the entrance of the Bristol Channel. From there, proceeding with a
slowness which must often have driven them to the verge of despair,
they circled the Scilly Islands, and it took them two more dreadful
days before they had rounded the Lizard.

The Odyssey of the _Virgen del Socorro_ had now stretched over no less
a period than a month. Three of the crew had by now become delirious;
all were reduced to half their ordinary weight, and with the exception
of the hardened seamen were on the point of collapse. Although they had
experienced several alarms, they had so far succeeded--no doubt owing
to the awful weather--in avoiding the vigilant eyes of the British
patrols. But now they no longer cared one way or the other; all the
fight had been knocked out of them by their sufferings.

On November 8th the little vessel approached the Goodwins. Shortly
after dawn a British destroyer was sighted and reported by the man
at the helm. Hardly a man on board, unless it was Lieutenant Koch,
took the trouble to raise his glassy eyes when he heard the danger
announced. Nor did they manifest any concern when it further became
evident that there was no avoiding the vigilant war vessel. Nothing
expressed so eloquently the fact that they regarded themselves
as beaten as their attitude of utter indifference when they were
challenged by the British destroyer. One and all were evidently
heartily glad to confess their nationality, the circumstances in which
they came to be there, and the extraordinary dangers through which they
had passed.

The _Virgen del Socorro_ was taken into Ramsgate, says _El Liberal_,
the Madrid newspaper which published the first brief account of the
adventures related above, and there we may well leave Lieutenant Koch
and his companions. They are henceforth in safe keeping, for, with all
their ingenuity and daring, the only thing they succeeded in doing was
to exchange one prison for another, and at the same time drag eight
free German citizens with them into durance vile.




THE POET'S DEATH IN BATTLE--HOW ALLEN SEEGER DIED

_A Young American in the Foreign Legion_

_Told by Bif Bear, a Young Egyptian in the Foreign Legion_

  The artists of Europe--the painters, poets, singers--the æsthetes
  of France and Italy, of Britain and Russian, and of Germany, the
  Hungarian musicians--all answered the "call of war" and threw
  their souls into the "rendezvous with death." Thousands of them
  died on the battlefields. Among them is the young English poet,
  Rupert Brooke, and the American poet, Allan Seeger, who "loved
  France and gave his life to her." This young American enlisted
  early in the war in the Foreign Legion. He was fighting in the
  battles in Champagne in July, 1916, when he fell. A young Egyptian,
  who was with the poet in the trenches, tells of his end. After
  the battle, he wrote this letter to Mrs. Caroline L. Weeks, of
  Boston, who has acted in the rôle of "marraine" (godmother) to many
  American volunteers. The following is a translation from the French
  forwarded from Paris.


I--STORY OF THE AMERICAN POET

It was in the Thiescourt Woods, I remember, that I saw Alan on his
return from convalescent leave. My section was in first line trenches
and his, in reserve, in the second line. I was on soup fatigue and was
going to the Chauffour Quarry when I saw him in front of me, walking
along alone. Throwing down the marmites (tin receptacles) with which
I was loaded, I rushed to shake him by the hand. He had, it seemed to
me, grown slightly thinner, his pale face seemed slightly paler, and
his eyes, his fine eyes with their far-away look, ever lost in distant
contemplation, were still as dreamy as ever.

He told me how sorry he was not to be still with me as he had been
transferred to the first section and I belonged to the third. But we
saw each other every day. He would recount the joys of his two months'
convalescent leave, and I shall never forget how one phrase was often
on his lips, "Life is only beautiful if divided between war and love.
They are the only two things truly great, fine and perfect, everything
else is but petty and mean. I have known love for the last few weeks
in all its beauty and now I want to make war, ... but fine war, a war
of bayonet charges, the desperate pursuit of an enemy in flight, the
entry as conqueror, with trumpets sounding, into a town that we have
delivered! Those are the delights of war! Where in civil life can be
found any emotion so fine and strong as those?"

And we would exalt our spirits with hopes of making an assault with the
bayonet, hopes that were not doomed to disappointment, for a few weeks
later we were to attack.


II--AN ODE TO AMERICAN PATRIOTISM

One day while we were in reserve at the Martin Quarries Alan came to
look for me. He was full of joy and showed me a telegram that he had
received from Paris, asking him to compose a poem which he himself
was to read in public at a Franco-American manifestation, for which
he was to receive forty-eight hours' leave. Alan was overjoyed at
the opportunity of obtaining leave, but was too retiring to think of
reading his poem himself; he would try, he told me, to have it read by
some one else.

The eve of the ceremony arrived--I cannot recall the date--but no
leave came. We were in the trenches and chance had placed me near
Seeger in "petit poste" (the small outlook post, some yards in advance
of the first line trench). He confessed that he had lost all hope of
going, and I tried to find all sorts of arguments to encourage him,
that his leave might come at dawn, and that by taking the train at
Ressons at 7 A.M. he could still reach Paris by noon and would
have plenty of time, as the ceremony was at 2.

The morning came, and instead of bringing the much desired permission
to leave it brought a terrible downpour of rain, and the day passed
sadly. He found consolation in the thought that July 4 would soon
arrive, when the Americans with the Foreign Legion might hope for
forty-eight hours' leave, as last year. Alas! He little thought that on
that date....

[The ceremony referred to was held on May 30, in connection with
Decoration Day celebrations. Wreaths to the Americans killed for France
were placed around the statue of Washington and Lafayette, in the Place
des Etats-Unis, Paris. By an unfortunate mistake the forty-eight hours'
leave granted for the event was made for June 30 instead of May 30. The
ode which Alan Seeger composed for the occasion was printed in _The
Sun_ a few days after the author had fallen in battle.]

On June 21 we left the sector of the Thiescourt Woods for an unknown
destination, which proved to be the Somme. We took the train at Estrees
St. Denis and on June 22 about 10 A.M. reached Boves. Under a
blazing sun, in heat that seemed to have escaped from the furnace of
hell, we started for Bayonviller. We had undergone no such march since
the war began.

Weighed down by their sacks, prostrated by the heat, men fell by
hundreds along the road. Hardly twenty of the 200 forming the company
arrived without having left the column. Seeger was one of these few.
He told me afterward of the terrible effort he had had to make not to
give up. At every halt he drank a drop of "tafia" (rum and coffee) to
"give himself heart," and when he reached the end of the march he was
worn out, but proud--he had not left the ranks.

We passed the eight days of repose at Bayonviller, almost always
together, seeking the greatest possible enjoyment in our life at
the moment and making dreams for the future after the war. Alan
confided to me that "after the war" caused him fear--that he could
not tell what destiny reserved for him, but that if the fates smiled
on him it was toward the Orient that he would make. He loved the
Orient--Constantinople, Cairo, Damascus, Beirut had a powerful
fascination for him; their names would plunge him into profound reverie.

"It is in the mysterious frame of the Orient," he used to say, "in its
dazzling light, in its blue, blue nights, among the perfumes of incense
and hashish, that I would live, love and die."

And then the talk would turn again on the war and he would say: "My
only wish now is to make a bayonet charge. After that I shall see.
Death may surprise me, but it shall not frighten me. It is my destiny.
'Mektoub' (it is written)." He was a real fatalist and drew courage and
resignation from his fatalism.

During the night of June 30-July 1 (1916) we left Bayonviller to move
nearer the firing line. We went to Proyart as reserves.

At 8 o'clock on the morning of July 1 there was roll call for the day's
orders and we were told that the general offensive would begin at 9
without us, as we were in reserve, and that we would be notified of the
day and hour that we were to go into action.

When this report was finished we were ordered to shell fatigue,
unloading 8 inch shells from automobile trucks which brought them up to
our position.

All was hustle and bustle. The Colonial regiments had carried the first
German lines and thousands and thousands of prisoners kept arriving and
leaving. Ambulances filed along the roads continuously. As news began
to arrive we left our work to seek more details, everything we could
learn seemed to augur well.

About 4 P.M. we left Proyart for Fontaine-les-Capy and in the
first line. Alan was beaming with joy and full of impatience for the
order to join in the action. Everywhere delirious joy reigned at having
driven the enemy back without loss for us. We believed that no further
resistance would be met and that our shock attack would finish the
Germans. After passing the night at Fontaine-les-Capy we moved in the
morning toward what had been the German first lines. I passed almost
all the day with Alan. He was perfectly happy.

"My dream is coming true," he said to me, "and perhaps this evening or
to-morrow we shall attack. I am more than satisfied, but it's too bad
about our July 4 leave. I cannot hope to see Paris again now before the
6th or 7th, but if this leave is not granted me 'Mektoub! Mektoub'!" he
finished with a smile.

The field of battle was relatively calm, a few shells fell, fired by
the enemy in retreat, and our troops were advancing on all sides. The
Colonials had taken Assevillers and the next day we were to take their
place in first line.

On July 3 (1916) about noon we moved toward Assevillers to relieve the
Colonials at nightfall. Alan and I visited Assevillers, picking up
souvenirs, postcards, letters, soldiers' notebooks and chattering all
the time, when suddenly a voice called out, "The company will fall in
to go to the first line."


III--LAST PARTINGS OF COMRADES

Before leaving one another we made each other the same promise as we
had made before the Champagne battle (September 25, 1915), that if
one of us fell so severely wounded that there was no hope of escape
the other would finish him off with a bullet in the heart rather than
let him await death in lingering torture. He showed me his revolver,
saying, "I have more luck than you. If I can still use one arm I shall
have no need of any one," and then we rejoined our different sections.

About 4 o'clock the order came to get ready for the attack. None could
help thinking of what the next few hours would bring. One minute's
anguish and then, once in the ranks, faces become calm and serene, a
kind of gravity falling upon them, while on each could be read the
determination and expectation of victory.

Two battalions were to attack Belloy-en-Santerre, our company being
the reserve of battalion. The companies forming the first wave were
deployed on the plain. Bayonets glittered in the air above the corn,
already quite tall. Scarcely had the movement begun when the enemy
perceived them and started a barrier fire (artillery fire to bar any
advance), the quick firers started their rapid, regular crackerlike
rat-tat. Bullets whizzed and shells exploded almost as they left the
gun, making a din infernal. And the wave went forward, always forward,
leaving behind the wounded and the dead.

The losses were heavy and the enemy made a desperate resistance. The
company of reserve was ordered to advance with the second wave of
assault. "Forward!" cried the Captain, and the company deployed "in
files of squadron," advancing slowly but surely under the enemy's
intense and murderous fire.

The first section (Alan's section) formed the right and vanguard of
the company, and mine formed the left wing. After the first bound
forward, we lay flat on the ground, and I saw the first section
advancing beyond us and making toward the extreme right of the village
of Belloy-en-Santerre. I caught sight of Seeger and called to him,
making a sign with my hand.

He answered with a smile. How pale he was! His tall silhouette stood
out on the green of the cornfield. He was the tallest man in his
section. His head erect and pride in his eyes, I saw him running
forward, with bayonet fixed. Soon he disappeared and that was the last
time I saw my friend.

"Forward!" And we made a second bound, right to the wave of assault,
which we left behind a little, and down we threw ourselves again.
The fusillade became more and more intense, reaching a paroxysm. The
mitrailleuses mow men down and the cannons thunder in desperation.
Bodies are crushed and torn to fragments by the shells, and the wounded
groan as they await death, for all hope of escaping alive from such a
hell has fled.

The air is saturated with the smell of powder and blood, everywhere
the din is deafening; men are torn with impatience at having to remain
without moving under such a fire. We struggle even for breath and
cries resound from every side. Suddenly a word of command, an order of
deliverance, passes from mouth to mouth. "Forward! With bayonets!"--the
command that Seeger had awaited so long.


IV--THE POET'S DEATH ON THE BATTLEFIELD

In an irresistible, sublime dash we hurl ourselves to the assault,
offering our bodies as a target. It was at this moment that Alan Seeger
fell heavily wounded in the stomach. His comrades saw him fall and
crawl into the shelter of a shell hole. Since that minute nobody saw
him alive.

I will spare you an account of the rest of the battle. As soon as the
enemy was driven back and Belloy-en-Santerre won I searched for news of
Seeger. I was told of his wound and was glad of it, for I thought he
had been carried away and henceforth would be far from the dangers of
bullets and shells.

Thus ended this Fourth of July that Seeger had hoped to celebrate in
Paris. On the next day we were relieved from the first lines and went
into reserve lines. A fatigue party was left to identify the dead.

Seeger was found dead. His body was naked, his shirt and tunic being
beside him and his rifle planted in the ground with the butt in the
air. He had tied a handkerchief to the butt to attract the attention of
the stretcher bearers. He was lying on his side with his legs bent.

It was at night by the light of a pocket electric lamp that he was
hastily recognized. Stretcher bearers took the body and buried it
next day in the one big grave made for the regiment, where lie a
hundred bodies. This tomb is situated at the hill 76 to the south of
Belloy-en-Santerre.

As I think of the circumstances of his death I am convinced that after
undressing to bandage himself he must have risen and been struck by a
second bullet. I asked permission on the night of July 6 (1916) when I
heard of his being wounded, to go and see him, but I was refused.




THE GUARDIAN OF THE LINE--HERO TALE OF LITHUANIA

_Told by Frederic Lees_

  One of the most remarkable facts connected with the war on the
  Russian front is the large number of women who have distinguished
  themselves by conspicuous bravery, sometimes in the actual
  fighting-line, but more often in a civilian capacity. This story
  deals with the ordeal undergone by a humble railway-crossing
  keeper's wife in Lithuania, as told in the _Wide World Magazine_.


I--"THE LONELIEST WOMAN IN THE WORLD"

One morning in April, 1915, Stephania Ychas, the wife of the keeper of
a railway-crossing to the north of the Lithuanian town of Shavli, felt
the saddest and loneliest woman in the world. Do what she could, she
found it impossible to rid herself of the feeling that a catastrophe
was imminent--that the terrible war into which her country had been
plunged meant the end of all things. Poor Lithuania! Once so fair a
place, now so desolate a wilderness!

Stephania's duties, in these troubled times, kept her continually on
the _qui vive_. At all hours of the day--and latterly during many of
the night--she had to be in and out of her little house, in order to
see that the rails were clear, or to note the numbers of the troop
trains as they swept past towards the north. Backwards and forwards,
from her door to the telephone, fixed against the wall on the
right-hand side of a little window through which she could overlook a
big sweep of the line in the direction of Shavli, she went, welcoming
the never-ending succession of trainloads of soldiers, wounded, or mere
war material passing on to the new line of defence, and reporting their
progress to the railway and military authorities.

Day after day, night after night, the great retreat of the Russian
forces continued, until, single-handed as she was, Stephania Ychas was
almost dropping with fatigue. A hundred times she told herself that
human flesh and blood could never stand such a strain. It was not the
fatigue alone which was crushing her. Added to her physical tortures
were mental ones, the feeling of being alone, so horribly alone, and
the knowledge that the enemy, as announced by the retreat and the
nerve-racking booming of the guns, was rapidly advancing on Shavli,
and that until Russia had had time to recover, the hated Teutons would
inevitably overrun Lithuania as far as Vilna. At night her brain
was filled with pictures of burning farms, ravaged orchards, and
indescribable scenes of brutality such as she knew the German soldiers
had been guilty of in Belgium and Poland.

A dozen times a day, dizzy and sick at heart, she had been on the
point of staggering to the telephone to inform the commander of a
neighbouring station that she could continue no longer. But a sense of
duty had held her back. When it came to a point of renunciation, her
stout Lithuanian heart said "Nay," and she recalled the parting from
her husband and his final adjurations.

Buried in thought, while waiting for a train which has just been
signalled from Shavli, she recalled the morning when Michael Ychas,
suddenly called to the Colours, had left her. It seemed like an
eternity since those days of the mobilization.


II--"GOOD-BYE, STEPHANIA--GUARD THE LINE WELL!"

"Good-bye, Stephania," he had said. "Be of good cheer whilst I am
away, and guard the line well. It is sad to leave you here all alone.
Sad to be obliged to leave one's native country and abandon it to
unknown dangers. How much better I should have liked to have defended
Lithuania, I, a Lithuanian bred and born, than to have been drafted
into a regiment bound for the Caucasus. As if the Government could not
trust us in our own country! However, Stephania, you are left, and you
are doing a man's duty. It makes me happy, in the midst of my misery,
to think that you are there to look after the home and the crossing and
the rails. Guard them well, Stephania, and rest assured that, in my
absence, I shall constantly pray to the Virgin to watch over you."

Her reflections were interrupted by a shriek from the locomotive of
the expected train, which was made up partly of compartments packed
with soldiers, partly of wagons filled with the most heterogeneous
collection of things she had ever seen in her life--pieces of machinery
piled one on the top of the other, heaps of metal articles of every
imaginable description, and every scrap of copper or lead, apparently,
which Shavli contained. A waving of hands from the soldiers, a friendly
yell from a hundred throats, and the train had sped on its way.

Stephania Ychas had no time now to waste over daydreaming. Hurrying
into her cottage, she went straight to the telephone and rang up the
commander of the station farther up the line. After ringing in vain for
fully a minute, she got the connection and made her report.

"Train number three hundred and forty-six passed North Shavli crossing
a minute ago," she said. "A mixed train, men and materials. Any news?"

"Shavli reports that things are getting warm," replied a voice. "I
should not be surprised to hear that we have to leave before the day's
out. You'd better 'phone to headquarters."

She lost not a moment in carrying out the suggestion.

"Halloa, halloa! Is that Shavli?"

"Yes," came a quick answer. "You're the North Shavli crossing-keeper,
aren't you? Good! Well, we were just about to call you up. Matters are
coming to a climax here. There are only two more trains to go through
now. One with men will be with you in a couple of minutes at the
latest; the other, with goods, should follow ten minutes afterwards. We
are telling the driver to pick you up."

At this point the speaker was called away from the telephone, and an
indistinct buzz as of a whole office in conversation, mingled with the
trampling of feet and the slamming of doors followed. But finally the
speaker returned.

"Halloa, halloa! Are you still there, North Shavli? Telephone forward
all I have said, and prepare them for the worst."

Stephania Ychas, now tingling with excitement, did as she was bid. Once
more she stood on duty to see the reported train pass, and again she
went to the telephone to send her report forward. Having finished, she
was about to hang up the receiver when, on looking through the window
on her left, her eyes caught sight of something unusual far down the
line, almost at the point where the metals curved out of view. To run
and fetch a pair of glasses which, ever since the beginning of the
war, she had kept hanging in their leather case by the side of the
fireplace, to bring them to bear on the point in question, and at the
same time to ring up Shavli, was the work of a minute. What she saw,
though her calm voice in no way revealed her inner emotion, made the
blood run cold through her veins.

"Halloa, halloa! Are you there, Shavli?"

A reply came in the affirmative.

"For Heaven's sake remain at the 'phone. There's foul work going on
near the great curve. You must give orders at once to keep back the
train."

"One moment, and I will return," replied the railway official.


III--A WOMAN'S MESSAGE: "THEY ARE DYNAMITING THE RAILROAD!"

A pause, which seemed to the woman with the glasses fixed to her eyes
an eternity, followed.

"You were just in time," continued the voice to her infinite relief.
"Courage! Fear not. Orders have been given to pick you up, with the
others along the line, when we evacuate the town by car. But tell us
what is happening."

"I can see a number of men tampering with the metals," telephoned
Stephania Ychas. "They have dismounted from their horses. One of them,
an officer, is giving orders. Yes, I can see now. They are Uhlans,
and are going to dynamite the line. There are at least twenty of
them, evidently a portion of an advance guard that has made a turning
movement round Shavli by way of the woods. Halloa, halloa! In the name
of Our Lady of Vilna, do not leave the instrument. It is a blessing
they did not begin by cutting the wire. Now they are scattering to
await the explosion. There!"--as the speaker beheld the explosion,
followed by a cloud of smoke and dust, which rose high in the air--"it
is done. Holy Virgin! They are making off now. No, the officer is
pointing here. They are coming towards me. Telephone to the nearest
military station to send me help immediately. And for the love of the
saints, come back to the instrument!"

Stephania Ychas left the receiver dangling by its cords, and made her
little home ready to withstand a siege. She locked and doubly bolted
the door, and with the object of giving the Uhlans the idea that the
place was uninhabited prepared to block up the windows with the boards
which, as in most Lithuanian country cottages, served as shutters,
fastened from the inside.
